Oblivion Roller Coaster at Alton Towers Theme Park from the YourDay DVD - YouTube
Oblivion Roller Coaster at Alton Towers Theme Park from the YourDay DVD
Want to watch this again later?
Sign in to add this video to a playlist.
Need to report the video?
Sign in to report inappropriate content.
Rating is available when the video has been rented.
This feature is not available right now. Please try again later.
Uploaded on Nov 29, 2008
This video is available in 16:9 high-quality widescreen and features the Oblivion roller coaster ride at Alton Towers theme park, located near Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire, England.
It is a steel roller coaster which became the worlds first vertical drop roller coaster.  It was open in 1998 and located in the Fantasy World area of the park.
While riders queue they are shown numerous videos showing The Lord of Darkness (played by Renny Krupinski). He apparently lives in the underground tunnel and tells you that the ride is perfectly safe.
One of the videos shows his alter ego, the Lord of Light, who is shown warning riders that they might die. Another video, shown at the cafe is a mock news flash detailing how a ride car has gone missing, this fuels the rumours that cars have fallen into the pit and have never been recovered. The Lord of Darkness leaves the last video with mocking, booming laughter, just as riders board the ride. These are all designed to build up fear and tension before the drop.
The roller coaster has a simple layout with a 180 ft drop at 87.9° degrees into a dark tunnel followed by a 180° banked turn back to the station. The open design cars accommodate sixteen passengers in two rows of eight. The back row is slightly raised to give passengers a clear view of the drop. As each car reaches the drop it is held by a drop chain (reverse of a lift chain) for a few seconds before the clutch is released allowing the riders to drop into a pitch black tunnel, whilst a pre-recorded and disembodied voice says 'don't look down' just before release. This can only be heard by the riders at the top of the drop track.  However, this was removed in 2004 after the park lost a court case over local residents complaining about the noise of the park.
The footage is taken from the YourDay DVD.  Visitors can wear special wristbands which trigger footage of you on the main rides and this customised footage is shown on the DVD.
The rides the DVD features include Congo River Rapids, Air and Nemesis.
Check out the how scary the vertical drop is!
Category
