Good Morning, Vietnam (1987) - IMDb
IMDb
There was an error trying to load your rating for this title.
Some parts of this page won't work property. Please reload or try later.
X Beta I'm Watching This!
Keep track of everything you watch; tell your friends.
Error
An unorthodox and irreverent DJ begins to shake up things when he is assigned to the U.S. Armed Services Radio station in Vietnam.
Director:
From $2.99 (SD) on Amazon Video
ON DISC
a list of 36 titles
created 19 Nov 2011
a list of 22 titles
created 25 Jul 2012
a list of 37 titles
created 06 Aug 2013
a list of 21 titles
created 12 Apr 2014
a list of 29 titles
created 21 Oct 2014
Title: Good Morning, Vietnam (1987)
7.3/10
Want to share IMDb's rating on your own site? Use the HTML below.
You must be a registered user to use the IMDb rating plugin.
Nominated for         1         Oscar. Another       7 wins & 3 nominations. See more awards  »
Videos
The true story of a heroic man, Hunter Patch Adams, determined to become a medical doctor because he enjoys helping people. He ventured where no doctor had ventured before, using humour and pathos.
Director: Tom Shadyac
English teacher John Keating inspires his students to look at poetry with a different perspective of authentic knowledge and feelings.
Director: Peter Weir
An android endeavors to become human as he gradually acquires emotions.
Director: Chris Columbus
The victims of an encephalitis epidemic many years ago have been catatonic ever since, but now a new drug offers the prospect of reviving them.
Director: Penny Marshall
After he dies in a car crash, a man searches heaven and hell for his beloved wife.
Director: Vincent Ward
A former radio DJ, suicidally despondent because of a terrible mistake he made, finds redemption in helping a deranged homeless man who was an unwitting victim of that mistake.
Director: Terry Gilliam
Because of an unusual aging disorder that has aged him four times faster than a normal human being, a boy enters the fifth grade for the first time with the appearance of a 40 year old man.
Director: Francis Ford Coppola
A gay cabaret owner and his drag queen companion agree to put up a false straight front so that their son can introduce them to his fiancée's right-wing moralistic parents.
Director: Mike Nichols
A mentally unstable photo developer begins to attack a middle-class family after his obsession with them becomes more sick and disturbing than any of them could imagine.
Director: Mark Romanek
Edit
Storyline
A new Disc Jockey is shipped from Crete to Vietnam to bring humor to Armed Forces Radio. He turns the studio on its ear and becomes wildly popular with the troops but runs afoul of the middle management who think he isn't G.I. enough. While he is off the air, he tries to meet Vietnamese especially girls, and begins to have brushes with the real war that never appears on the radio. Written by John Vogel <jlvogel@comcast.net>
See All (51)  »
Taglines:
In 1965, military D.J. Adrian Cronauer was sent to Vietnam to build morale.  His strategy: keep 'em laughing.  His problem: staying out of trouble. See more  »
Genres:
15 January 1988 (USA) See more  »
Also Known As:
Buenos días, Vietnam See more  »
Filming Locations:
70 mm 6-Track (70 mm prints)| Dolby (35 mm prints)
Color:
Did You Know?
Trivia
Twice in the film Adrian is seen pulling out the Beatles "Help!" album from the stations collection, but no Beatles songs are ever heard on the soundtrack. See more »
Goofs
When Cronauer first goes to see the Vietnamese village with Tuan, he is wearing a white shirt, but a plaid shirt in the close up when they enter the village. See more »
Quotes
Dickerson : You better not even come within range of anything that happens or your ass is grass, and I'm a lawn mower.
Written by Big Joe Williams (as Joe Williams)
Performed by THEM
Courtesy of PolyGram Special Projects
A division of PolyGram Records, Inc.
(United States) – See all my reviews
It's been a while since I've seen Good Morning Vietnam but I was reminded of it with the untimely death of Bruno Kirby earlier this week of August 2006. While the film is clearly Robin William's vehicle, Kirby, playing 2nd Lt. Hauck, is the perfect comedic foil. Kirby plays the uptight Hauck, who can't wait to get his hands on the microphone, in way that brings many of the laughs and sets Robin Williams up for more. I continue to use his line "and if you doooooo..." when someone, e.g. my wife or children, do not seem to be listening to me intently enough. Kirby does this in a scene where he is giving instructions to his underlings, who are routinely ignoring him as they comment on things having nothing to do with his agenda. This is a great movie. Williams gives one of his best performances, and you already know how I feel about Bruno Kirby. Another newcomer in the cast is Forest Whitaker, who would later make his mark in The Crying Game and as the host of the update TV series "The Twilight Zone."
8 of 10 people found this review helpful.  Was this review helpful to you?
Yes
