Young Guns II (1990) - IMDb
IMDb
There was an error trying to load your rating for this title.
Some parts of this page won't work property. Please reload or try later.
X Beta I'm Watching This!
Keep track of everything you watch; tell your friends.
Error
In 1881, cattle baron John Chisum pays a bounty to Patrick Floyd Garrett to kill outlaw Billy the Kid.
Director:
From $2.99 (SD) on Amazon Video
ON DISC
a list of 33 titles
created 17 Oct 2013
a list of 22 titles
created 21 Oct 2013
a list of 25 titles
created 04 Jan 2014
a list of 31 titles
created 29 Dec 2014
a list of 24 titles
created 07 Jun 2015
Title: Young Guns II (1990)
6.4/10
Want to share IMDb's rating on your own site? Use the HTML below.
You must be a registered user to use the IMDb rating plugin.
Nominated for         1         Oscar. Another       2 wins & 2 nominations. See more awards  »
Photos
A group of young gunmen, led by Billy the Kid, become deputies to avenge the murder of the rancher who became their benefactor. But when Billy takes their authority too far, they become the hunted.
Director: Christopher Cain
Two garbage men uncover a conspiracy involving illegal toxic dumping and decide to bring the whole operation down with the help of a crazed Vietnam vet.
Director: Emilio Estevez
Wyatt Earp is a movie about a man and his family. The movie shows us the good times and the bad times of one of the West's most famous individuals.
Director: Lawrence Kasdan
A successful lawman's plans to retire anonymously in Tombstone, Arizona, are disrupted by the kind of outlaws he was famous for eliminating.
Directors: George P. Cosmatos, Kevin Jarre
Stars: Kurt Russell,  Val Kilmer,  Sam Elliott
Two cops have to observe a woman. One of them falls in love with her.
Director: John Badham
Edit
Storyline
Billy "The Kid" and his gang are wanted by the law, and when "Doc" Scurlock and Chavez are captured, Billy has to save them. They escape and set south for Mexico. "Let's hire a thief to catch one", John S. Chisum said, so he paid Pat Garrett, one of Billy's former partners, $1000 for the killing of William H. Bonney aka Billy "The Kid". Written by Lars J. Aas <larsa@colargol.edb.tih.no>
The West just got wilder. See more  »
Genres:
1 August 1990 (USA) See more  »
Also Known As:
Hell Bent for Leather See more  »
Filming Locations:
Did You Know?
Trivia
Although the movie depicts Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid as close friends who were at one time partners in crime this is a considerable stretching of the truth. In reality their association was much more casual in nature stemming from their mutual patronage of Beaver Smith's saloon in Fort Sumner where they were both avid players of the card game Casino. They had a cordial acquaintance with one another but were never close friends nor did they ever ride together as outlaws. See more »
Goofs
After his capture, when Billy is in the room with Deputy Bell, there is a knock on the door, Deputy Bell cocks his Winchester, putting the hammer back in the firing position. When the door opens, the Madam, Jane Greathouse, is standing there, Bell has the Winchester at his shoulder and the hammer is in the down, or fired position. See more »
Quotes
[Upon discovering a new boom town is mining guano]
Arkansas Dave Rudabaugh : I've been to gold towns, silver towns, I've even been to turquoise towns. But I have never been to a bat shit town. Can't wait to see the women!
Written and Performed by Jon Bon Jovi
(c) 1990 Bon Jovi Publishing / PRI Music, Inc. (ASCAP)
Courtesy of PolyGram Records, Inc.
(Culver City, California) – See all my reviews
YOUNG GUNS 2 was a stunning achievement, a sequel that managed to surpass its brilliant predecessor, 1988's YOUNG GUNS.  YOUNG GUNS 2 follows the story of Billy the Kid, already an outlaw and now riding with the cow thief Pat Garrett.  Garrett is offered the position of Sheriff by the Governor, who finds himself constantly cowed in his efforts to catch Billy the Kid.  In the Governor's mind, you must hire a thief to catch one, hence Garrett is the perfect choice.  Pat Garrett, who has long planned to go respectable, siezes the opportunity and turns on his friend and partner.  What follows is a great western adventure, rich with themes of sin and redemption and the tragedy of brother against brother.  That alone makes a great flick.  But then YOUNG GUNS 2 offers the question... what if Pat Garrett was conflicted about his choice?  What if he still had feelings for the Kid?  What if he let him go?  This is good stuff, folks.  The leads do the material justice, with Estevez jumping back into the role of Billy like an old and comfortable suit that still fits perfectly.  William Petersen gives a nuanced performance as Pat Garrett, a man driven by both loyalty and selfishness.  Of course no review of this film should fail to herald the talents of Lou Diamond Phillips.  Phillips is an actor who constantly seems to raise the bar for himself, and YOUNG GUNS 2 is no exception.  His Chavez is MORE spiritual, MORE effortlessly wise... dare I say MORE Indian than he was even in the first installment.  Hopefully, Phillips will be with us for a very long time.  Kiefer Sutherland, Christian Slater, Balthazar Getty, and Alan Ruck round out the talented cast.  So finally, do yourself a favor with this one, YOUNG GUNS 2 is an amazing film experience.
27 of 32 people found this review helpful.  Was this review helpful to you?
Yes
