Home - Wellington College
In
The Master's Welcome
"Hard to imagine it done better. A site and campus to dream about. A school with mind, heart, guts and a constant fizz."
Good Schools Guide 2016
When you make your first visit to Wellington College you immediately get a sense that it is more than just a school. The beautiful grounds and breath-taking buildings see to that, as does the palpable sense of purpose among every pupil and member of staff you meet. I genuinely do not believe that there is a better coeducational boarding and day school for 13 – 18 year olds in the land.
The College, founded in 1853 as a living memorial to the Duke of Wellington, sought to deliver an inspirational education for all of its pupils. As the school grew, so too did the identity of those pupils. It is an identity built on intellectual curiosity, on true independence, on a generous and far-reaching inclusivity and on the courage to be properly and unselfishly individual. It is, in short, the capacity to be inspired to become the very best you can be. And it is these qualities that are present in the thousands of small interactions that happen all the time here, the little daily miracles that make this such a special place. After all, the school we build is the school we build together, and every pupil who passes through Wellington leaves an indelible mark on our community. It is my absolute responsibility to help all our pupils become the very best that they can be, and to develop the identity that marks them out as a true Wellingtonian.
Wellington College is set in 400 acres of beautiful parkland in leafy Berkshire, one hour from Central London and just 40 minutes from Heathrow. Please do explore our on-line tour to get a sense of the scope and size of the school, for our campus is quite simply stunning. Wellington’s curriculum is vibrant, demanding and progressive, and with our ground-breaking Wellbeing course and classes in Philosophy and Thinking, Wellington has become nationally renowned as a centre for curriculum development. Our stunning examination results and university outcomes speak for themselves.
Creativity flourishes and it was no surprise when the Arts Council awarded us Artsmark Gold in recognition of the outstanding provision and standards across all the Arts at the school. We have a “premier league” reputation as one of the best schools for sport in the UK and, in recent years, our teams have achieved national renown and titles in hockey, rugby, golf, shooting, triathlon, squash, equestrianism, cricket, rackets and polo. Outward-facing in all that we do, the College’s focus on service, leadership and character education means that Wellingtonians leave the school fully prepared for the challenges of adult life in the 21st Century.
RT @WillGreenwood: Mia!!! Awesomeness!!! http://EPg3ox7z9g
@Welly_Master | 18 January 2017
Choice lies at the heart of our co-curriculum and is central to developing the Wellington Identity which ensures that all our pupils are Inspired, Intellectual, Independent, Individual and Inclusive. Our pupils and our staff see every day as an opportunity, a chance to grow and a chance to learn and the journey as a life-long learner begins the moment a child starts at Wellington.
Will you let your child join us on that journey? It could be the most inspired choice you ever make.
Julian Thomas – 14th Master of Wellington College
