Calcium & Blood Clotting | LIVESTRONG.COM
Calcium & Blood Clotting
Last Updated: Aug 16, 2013
Laura Parr
Laura Parr began her professional writing career in 2008 contributing to websites such as Travelbox, 1stop and Traveldojo. She now writes health and fitness-related articles. Parr earned a diploma of adult nursing from the University of Brighton, followed by a postgraduate certificate in public health from the University of Manchester.
Calcium plays an essential role in blood clotting. Photo Credit boiling blood image by Adrian Hillman from <a href="http://www.fotolia.com">Fotolia.com</a>
Your body uses calcium not only to keep teeth and bones strong, but also to enable muscles to contract, to assist in the transmission of neural impulses and to maintain cell membrane stability and permeability. It is also an important part of the blood clotting process and because your body is unable to generate calcium, it is important that you have adequate daily intake.
The Clotting Process
Whenever your skin becomes broken, the sticky platelets contained in the blood form clots to stop blood flow. Calcium works together with vitamin K and a protein called fibrinogen in the clotting cascade. Without adequate levels of calcium and vitamin K, blood will take longer to clot, and if both nutrients are missing you might bleed to death. Most people gain enough calcium and vitamin K from their diets, but in some cases supplements may be prescribed.
The Clotting Cascade
As soon as blood from a wound is exposed to the air, the platelets disintegrate and react with fibrinogen to create fibrin: a mass of tiny threads. This triggers a whole series of reactions that rely on adequate levels of calcium and vitamin K to work. The fibrin hardens very quickly to form a scab over the wound.
Foods that Contain Calcium
Spinach and other dark green vegetables contain high levels of calcium. Photo Credit Blattspinat image by Yvonne Bogdanski from Fotolia.com
Low-fat dairy products such as milk, yogurt and cheese contain a lot of calcium, and you will also find calcium in dried beans, tofu, spinach, broccoli and dark green vegetables. Certain cereals, vegan dairy substitutes and juices may be fortified with it. You must get an adequate daily intake of vitamin D to assist your body's absorption of calcium, so make sure that if you take calcium supplements, they contain vitamin D as well.
Recommended Intake
Adults under the age of 50 need around 1,000 mg calcium each day while older adults need around 1,200 mg each day. Children and adolescents need a higher intake of calcium because they grow rapidly. Those under 10 should get around 400 to 800 mg each day and those aged 11 to 24 need around 1,200 to 1,500 mg every day.
Do I Need Extra Calcium?
Most people gain enough calcium from their diet, but if you don't you could be prescribed dietary supplements. Photo Credit Fallen brown bottle of last yellow pills isolated on white image by Olga Sapegina from Fotolia.com
Most people gain enough calcium by eating a healthy and varied diet, but those at risk include menopausal women who may be at risk of rapid bone loss, vegetarians and those who are lactose intolerant because they may not be getting enough calcium from their diets. If you feel that you may be at risk contact your family physician.
Meeting Your Calcium Needs
Some cereals are fortified with calcium. Photo Credit rural life(cereals) image by Aleksandr Popov from Fotolia.com
If you have been told that you need to increase your calcium intake, try using low-fat or fat-free milk to make mashed potatoes, puddings and smoothies. Add low-fat or fat-free cheese to meals or try calcium-fortified tofu with fried vegetables or meat. Include other calcium-fortified foods such as cereals and drinks in your diet.
Related Searches
Lose Weight. Feel Great Change your life with MyPlate by LIVESTRONG.COM
GOAL
Gain 2 pounds per week
Gain 1.5 pounds per week
Gain 1 pound per week
Gain 0.5 pound per week
Maintain my current weight
Lose 0.5 pound per week
Lose 1 pound per week
Lose 1.5 pounds per week
Lose 2 pounds per week
GENDER
