Dick Turpin the Infamous Highway Robber : Biography
Source
Dick Turpin riding on Black Bess, from a Victorian era toy  theatre.
Legend has it that Turpin's father was acquainted with smugglers who worked  off the coast of East Anglia, as times were hard and the price of ale had been  rising. Although ales purchased from the smugglers may have been cheaper, their  trade was illegal. Thus Dick Turpin may well have been introduced to criminal  activities from an early age.
When he was sixteen, Turpin moved south, and was apprenticed to a butcher in  the Whitechapel district of London ï¿½ in those days, only a village on the  outskirts of the capital. It was said that during his apprenticeship, he "conducted himself in a loose and disorderly manner." Some have argued that  perhaps he was simply in the wrong career, or others that he was simply lazy.
Turpin married his childhood sweetheart Elizabeth Millington in 1728 (at the  age of 21, by other accounts), and after he finished his apprenticeship they  moved north to Buckhurst Hill, Essex (on the modern boundary of Northern  London). There Turpin opened his own butcher's shop.
Beginning of criminal activities
Comment "it is very useful for our topic on the highwaymen"
Rather than rely on legitimate suppliers for his stock-in-trade, Turpin  turned to stealing the sheep, lamb and cattle, which was so serious a criminal  offence it was punishable by death. Scholars and historians are divided as to  what caused Turpin to engage in crime in the first place. Some claim it was out  of financial necessity; whilst others believe, through studying Turpin's later  actions, that his notorious deeds were done through a sense of thrill-seeking.  Others believe he was simply too greedy to pay for legitimate stock, and/or too  lazy to earn an honest living, and thus a simple brigand.
The life of a fugitive
Turpin was caught stealing two oxen, and was forced to flee the area and  leave his wife and business behind. With customs officers in hot pursuit, Turpin  had the common sense not to stay in a tavern or inn, where he could have been  found easily. Turpin fled into the depths of the Essex countryside and lived  rough and wild. For a time he lived in caves along the coast of East Anglia, and  supported himself by robbing the smugglers who operated there ï¿½ perhaps the same  characters he had met earlier in life.
Eventually he moved on again, this time hiding in Epping Forest (which was  larger and far more verdant than it is today, and often used by royalty to hunt  deer).
 
In with the Gregory Gang
Turpin fell in with the Gregory Gang (also known as the Essex gang). They  were a group of around twenty bandits, who operated from secret hideouts in  Epping Forest.
The Gregory Gang were notorious around Essex and London. They bravely, or  perhaps foolishly, stole and killed royal game which had been set aside by the  gamekeepers for the King's own hunts (see poaching). If caught doing this, they  would surely face the gallows, or maybe even face the Hanging, drawing and  quartering method of execution. This is because it was considered high treason,  as poaching the King's own deer was considered as bad as stealing the Crown  Jewels.
The three ringleaders of the Gregory Gang were brothers after whom the gang  was named: Samuel, Jasper and Jeremy Gregory. The other gang members include  Thomas Hadfield, Thomas Barnfield, Thomas Rowden, Mary Brazier, John Fielder,  Herbert Haines, John Jones, James Parkinson, Joseph Rose, Ned Rust, William  Saunders, Humphry Walker, and John Wheeler. There may have been other members  who were either not identified or who were only occasional associates of the  Gang.
The gang was not limited to mere poaching. They attempted an armed robbery at  a gentleman's house at Woodford, Essex, but the inhabitants of the village drove  the rogues off without their being able to accomplish anything. The gang  appeared unfazed by this. In March 1735, Turpin, along with the Gregory brothers  attacked the Earl of Suffolk's servant in Epping Forest and took from him his  horse valued at ï¿½80 (this in a time where horses were a more valued commodity  than gold). A few weeks later, Sir Caesar Child was attacked in the Forest by  the gang who fired at the coachman without bidding him to stand, and shot off  the tip of his nose. They robbed him of ï¿½25. Allegedly, all these acts were  orchestrated by Turpin, although this is not confirmed.
It is certain that Turpin learned a lot from the gang.
As Turpin joined them, the Gregory Gang were entering a particularly violent  phase of their criminal career. They had begun to specialise in forced entry  into (usually isolated) houses around the Home Counties, and terrorising the  occupants to make them reveal the whereabouts of hidden valuables.
By 1735, the London Evening Post regularly reported the exploits of Turpin  and 'The Essex Gang' and the King had offered a reward of ï¿½50 for their capture.
The Loughton incident
During a soccer match between Scottish clubs Motherwell and Kilmarnock on 25th August 2007, Kilmarnock's Rhian Dodds scored a winning goal in the 90th minute. The stadium announcer, believing the win to be undeserved, credited the goal to 'Dick Turpin'
On 8 February 1735 Read's Weekly Journal reported one such attack: 'On  Saturday night last, about seven o'clock, five rogues entered the house of Widow  Shelley at Loughton in Essex, having pistols. And threatened to murder the old  lady, if she would not tell them where her money lay, which she obstinately  refusing for some time, they threatened to lay her across the fire, if she did  not instantly tell them, which she would not do. But her son being in the room,  and threatened to be murdered, cried out, he would tell them, if they would not  murder his mother, and did, whereupon they went upstairs, and took near ï¿½100, a  silver tankard, and other plate, and all manner of household goods. They  afterwards went into the cellar and drank several bottles of ale and wine, and  broiled some meat, ate the relicts of a filet of veal. While they were doing  this, two of their gang went to Mr Turkles, a farmer, who rents one end of the  widow's house, and robbed him of above ï¿½20, and then they all went off, taking  two of the farmer's horses, to carry off their luggage, the horses were found on  Sunday the following morning in Old Street, and stayed about three hours in the  house.'
This particular raid took place on 1 February 1735 and widow Shelly's house  was in Traps Hill, Loughton. It was reported the gang had made away with ï¿½700, a  huge amount of money in those days. It is the best surviving account of the  Gregory Gang's activities. The Loughton Incident was also their last ever  criminal activity as a gang.
Although the newspaper report does not specifically mention Turpin, it seems  highly likely that he was a member of the gang on this occasion. Turpin often  carried out his robberies in the company of a man named Thomas Rowden (formerly  a metal-worker, now outlawed) and a report at the time states that Rowden was  involved in the robbery at Loughton. A more recent author has written that the  crime was conceived, planned and scouted by Turpin but no evidence is given for  this.
Turpin's joining the gang would prove a bad omen for them.
Shortly after the Loughton incident, constables worked hard to track them  down, and did so not long after. The Gregory Gang were tracked down and  surprised by police officers whilst the criminals were living up the good life  with their spoils in a tavern in Westminster. Turpin managed to escape by  jumping out of a window, but the three ringleaders of the gang were not so lucky  ï¿½ they were caught and hanged at the gallows as common thieves.
Thomas Hadfield, one of Turpin's closest friends within the gang, escaped  with Turpin through the tavern window, but refused to continue with criminal  activity. The other gang members rapidly dispersed also, and didn't bother to  regroup in the forest. They had either had enough, or were too scared of the  hangman. This was the end of the Gregory Gang.
The birth of Dick Turpin the highwayman
Upon the breakup of the Gregory Gang, and the capture and execution of  others, the only gang members left still indulging in criminal behaviour were  Turpin himself and the raucous Thomas Rowden. The duo changed their tactics from  robbing isolated farmhouses to robbing stagecoaches passing through Epping  Forest, which they found to be considerably easier for two men instead of a  gang. At last, Turpin had become what he was destined to become ï¿½ a highwayman.
Soon they had carried out hundreds of highway robberies on the outskirts of  London, and Turpin got lots of experience of this type of crime. Turpin, being  organised, cunning and cautious, was soon operating by himself.
The ultimate fate of Thomas Rowden is unknown, although it is believed that  his lack of subtlety and discretion led him to get caught and subsequently  hanged, but not before he put a curse on his name stating that any child named  Thomas within his family would subsequently die.
Partnership with Tom King
Later Turpin went into partnership with Tom King, "the Gentleman Highwayman",  who at that time was just as famous as Turpin himself, although a less well  known highwayman than Turpin today. "Captain King", as he was sometimes called,  was said to have had better manners, and was said to be more dashing than  Turpin, and being flattering to his victims was a deliberate tactic of his. King  was the kind of swashbuckling, devil-may-care character into which legend would  later transform Turpin.
Turpin and King met on the road one night when the former attempted to rob  the latter. King responded with the words: "What is this; dog eat dog?"
The two joined forces and it proved to be a highly successful partnership  (unlike Turpin's previous short-lived partnership with Thomas Rowden). The pair  established a hide-out at the remains of an Iron Age fort, now known as Loughton  Camp.
From one particular cave in Epping Forest, they could watch a road without  being seen, and robbed virtually anyone who passed along it. Even local peddlers  started to carry weapons for protection. By late 1737, Turpin had achieved such  notoriety that another bounty of ï¿½100 was placed on his head - a reward which  was to transform him from a common footpad into a murderer.
Turpin becomes a murderer
Numerous acts of murder are attributed to Dick Turpin, although it is not  clear which ones were actually committed by him and which weren't, due to  centuries of embellishment. There is of course no doubt he did commit murder,  but the questions are; how many times did he commit murder; who were his  victims; and where did Turpin's murders take place? Historians have debated  these questions for centuries.
Turpin's first kill was probably a man named Thomas Morris,  whom he killed on 4 May 1735. Morris was a servant of Henry Thomson, one of the  keepers of Epping Forest, and during a routine walkabout of the forest Morris  accidentally came across Turpin at Fairmead Bottom, near Loughton. Morris tried  to apprehend him (there was a big reward for Turpin's capture at the time) but  was immediately shot by Turpin.
Once again Turpin took to his heels, only this time with a far greater crime  on his hands than theft. Despite the high risk of capture, Turpin visited his  estranged wife who was now living in Hertford, possibly suspecting (accurately,  as it turned out) that he would never see her again. Turpin was indeed nearly  caught and only very narrowly avoided capture at this point.
Black Bess
Turpin's next exploit was nothing less than bizarre. One night, while on the  road to London (on the way to meet with King), he took a fancy to a particularly  fine and splendid black horse ridden by a man called Major and forced him to  exchange it for his own jaded mount. Mr. Major didn't really have a choice, as  he had a musket pointed at him.
Turpin named his new pride 'Black Bess'. Mr. Major didn't take the loss lying  down. His horse was a rare thoroughbred and one of the finest, quickest and most  magnificent beasts in all the land. Dick Turpin had now a very fine horse and a  determined enemy.
The death of the "gentleman highwayman"
A furious Mr. Major issued handbills around the pubs of London, describing  his magnificent black steed and naming Turpin as the thief. The horse was traced  to the Red Lion pub in Whitechapel, where Turpin had stabled it. When Tom King  came to collect the horse for his companion, he was recognised and arrested.
Turpin, who had been waiting nearby, rode toward the constables holding King  and fired at them. King broke free, and he joined his friend. By all accounts  the ensuing gun fight was hellish and chaotic. At one point, it appeared as  though the pair of highwaymen were winning the gunfight against the constables.  However, ironically, in a heated moment of extreme panic and confusion, Turpin  shot King ï¿½ not realising it was him. Shocked at what he had done, and believing  his companion dead, Turpin fled the scene on Black Bess.
It is known that King, as he lay dying from his gunshot wound, informed the  surviving constables of the locations of his hideouts in Epping forest. Exactly  why he did we will never know, and so this is open to interpretation ï¿½ perhaps  he was not in control of what he was saying due to his mortal injury, or perhaps  he was deliberately trying to trap Turpin so that he would get caught in revenge  for inflicting his injury. Luckily for Turpin, he was wise, intelligent and  savvy enough not to return to the Epping forest hideouts, where constables were  in wait. Turpin's highwayman days were over.
The legendary ride to York
Dick Turpin is probably the most legendary highwayman of all time, and his  rapid flight from London to York is perhaps the most famous part of this legend.  Mention the name of Turpin to most people, and they will tell you he was a  daring and dashing rogue who famously rode this trip of two hundred miles on his  faithful mare, Black Bess, in less than fifteen hours. In so doing, Turpin  actually got to York before news of his misdemeanours in London. Tests on horses  that specialise in endurance events have shown that this would have been totally  impossible.
Various inns that still stand along the A1 (at the time called the Great  North Road, the main road connecting the north of England to the south), such as  the Roebuck Inn, Stevenage, claim that Turpin ate his lunch there that night, or  stopped off there for a brief respite for his horse. If he had really stopped at  every inn that claims this then he wouldn't have had time to ride anywhere.
Harrison Ainsworth, in his famous 1834 romance Rookwood, immortalised  this with a spirited account of this wonderful ride by Dick Turpin on his mare,  and it is in this connection that Turpin's name has been generally remembered.
However, historians have frequently argued that Turpin never actually made  this speedy journey, and that, as far as Turpin is concerned, the incident is  pure fiction. They argue that such a ride was really made by John Nevison, known  as "Swift Nick", born and raised at Wortley village near Sheffield and a  well-known highwayman in the time of Charles II some 50 years before Turpin, who  to establish an alibi rode from Gad's Hill (near Rochester, Kent) to York (some  190 miles) in about 15 hours.
A popular TV series, Dick Turpin, starred Richard O'Sullivan as a  fictionalised Turpin and Michael Deeks as his sidekick Swiftnick despite the  large variation in time.
Besides, it is well known that Turpin first rode into Lincolnshire following  the Whitechapel skirmish, and that he then subsequently moved over the Humber  into the Yorkshire town of Brough near Hull, before eventually making his first  visit to York.
Life as 'John Palmer'
Turpin took up a new life in the North of England, setting up bases in  Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, where he would be largely, or indeed wholly,  unknown. He bought a large set of barns and stables just outside Corby with his  ill-gotten gains and ï¿½ going under the assumed identity 'John Palmer' ï¿½ posed as  a large-scale yet legitimate horse dealer. Outwardly, he was a wealthy and  respectable member of the community.
Turpin didn't know anything about horse breeding, or selling on the horse  market. Accordingly, Turpin was resolved once again to theft. Little did his  customers know that the horses he was selling were actually stolen from other  horse owners in the two very counties he was operating in (mostly acquired  during raiding incursions into Lincolnshire, as he was residing in Yorkshire).  In some cases, Turpin would steal the horses from farms or enclosures or  stables, wait a few months, and then sell them back onto the victim without  their knowing. A risky business, but Turpin got away with it for a while, and  made a small fortune too.
Final capture
At some point in early 1739, 'Palmer' returned from a hunt to his lodgings in  the Green Dragon Inn, at Welton, a small Yorkshire village, near Brough, 12  miles (20 km) from Hull, about 37 miles (60 km) from York. He was frustrated due  to the fact he was empty-handed, and probably drunk.
He was bound over to keep the peace after he took the fancy to shoot his  landlord's gamecock in the street and then threatened to shoot a bystander who  took exception to the act. 'Palmer' had no money on his person and accordingly  was unable to provide sureties so that he would be released, and was committed  to the House of Correction.
As he was taken into custody, local authorities made enquiries as to how  exactly 'Mr. Palmer' made his money, and inevitably the constables learned of  several outstanding complaints made against 'John Palmer' for sheep and horse  stealing in Lincolnshire.
Turpin was transferred to the dungeons of York's Debtors' Prison (now part of  the York Castle Museum). From his cell, Turpin wrote to the sibling of his  estranged wife (his brother-in-law) who still resided at Hempstead in Essex,  Turpin's real birthplace. The letter was a plea for help; requesting his  brother-in-law to 'procure an evidence from London that could give me a  character that would go a great way towards my being acquitted' i.e. provide him  with an alibi.
The plan might have worked, but it backfired. In those days, postage was  payable by the recipient of a letter, not the poster. Turpin's brother-in-law  refused to pay the sixpence postage demanded, for what (he reckoned) was  probably the 18th century equivalent of spam junk mail, and as such the letter  was not delivered to him. This unpaid sixpence would prove the price of Turpin's  life.
The unread letter then naturally fell into the hands of John Smith, as the  village postmaster (Smith was also the village schoolmaster, who had taught  Turpin to read and write). Smith recognised the handwriting of his former pupil  immediately and travelled to York to consult with the magistrate and identify  Palmer as Turpin. Smith, his former friend and mentor, collected a ï¿½200 reward  for identifying the notorious highwayman to the authorities.
Execution and burial
Ironically, Turpin was never convicted of being a highwayman or a murderer.  He was convicted of being a horse-rustler, something which we may today consider  far less serious. However, unfortunately for Turpin, in those days  horse-rustling was considered a crime so serious it was punishable by death. On  22 March 1739, 'John Palmer alias Richard Turpin' was convicted at the Grand  Jury House in York of two indictments of horse-rustling.
Pleas from his father to have the sentence commuted to transportation fell on  deaf ears. His father had been cleared a few days earlier at the Essex assizes  of horse-stealing, one of Turpin's stolen horses having been found at his  alehouse.
Between his sentence and execution, visitors frequented Turpin's cell as  though he were something of a celebrity. He was resolved to meet his death with  dignity and calm. He spent the last of his money, in which he bought new clothes  and shoes and hired five mourners for 10 shillings each.
On 7 April 1739, Dick Turpin rode through the streets of York in an open  cart, being theatrical and bowing to the gawking crowds. At York Knavesmire (now  the racecourse) he climbed the ladder to the gibbet and then sat for half an  hour addressing the crowd in the manner of an entertainer, chatting to the  guards and the executioner.
Ironically, the hangman was Thomas Hadfield, once Turpin's friend and a  former Gregory Gang member (he had been pardoned because he had agreed to be the  hangman).
An account in the York Courant 7 April 1739 of Turpin's execution, notes his  brashness even at the end, "with undaunted courage looked about him, and after  speaking a few words to the topsman, he threw himself off the ladder and expired  in about five minutes." Thus in death at least, Turpin attained some of the  gallantry that had eluded him in life.
And so, despite the fame of his hanging, Turpin's death was technically a  suicide. He was said to have been buried in the churchyard of St George's  Church, York. However, a short time after the burial his body was dug up and  stolen by body-snatchers working for anatomists, but it appears to have been  subsequently recovered and reburied in the same place, this time with the  addition of quicklime to destroy the remains rapidly. A headstone in the  churchyard commemorates him, but is not at the precise location, which remains  undiscovered.
In popular culture
Turpin appears in Harrison Ainsworth's romantic novel Rookwood,  published in 1834. It describes Turpin making the ride to York. Historians argue  that such a ride was really made by John Nevison, known as "Swift Nick" some 50  years before Turpin.
In 1964, Walt Disney made a Technicolor feature film in England entitled "The Legend of Young Dick Turpin", starring David Weston as Dick Turpin and  William Franklyn as Tom King, with Bernard Lee as the leader of a den of thieves  and Maurice Denham as a stable owner who betrays Turpin to the authorities. The  film, made to be shown on the Disney programme on US television, but given  cinema release in Europe during 1965, was a fast-paced and entertaining  interpretation of the legend and bore little resemblance to the actual  historical facts. Ron Grainer; Norman Newell and Robert Westerby wrote a theme  song for it entitled "The Ballad of Dick Turpin", sung over the opening and end  titles by Val Doonican and the lyrics of which explained the legend rather than  the facts of the Turpin story. In this version of the tale, Turpin is a young  farmer in Essex who falls foul of the local squire (played by Roger Booth), who,  because Turpin is unable to pay a heavy fine unjustly imposed on him, seizes  Turpin's farm and land and horse (Black Bess), causing Turpin to steal back his  horse and go on the run as an outlaw with a price on his head, eventually  meeting up with Tom King and becoming a highwayman. At the end of the film,  having been helped to escape from Newgate Prison in London by two friends  (played by George Cole and a young Leonard Whiting) who have also arranged for  him a passage to America on a ship, Turpin narrowly misses his rendevouz with  the ship, which sails without him and, with the law hot on his heels, he sets  out on his famous ride to York on Black Bess. British cinema audiences got to  see this film before the Americans, as it wasn't shown on US television until  February, 1966.
A popular 1970s British children's television series, Dick Turpin,  starred Richard O'Sullivan as a fictionalised Turpin and Michael Deeks as his  sidekick Swiftnick. The show was made by London Weekend Television for the  ITV network (It is also noted for a memorable error in one scene where Turpin is  riding his horse down a lane only for telegraph poles and wires to be clearly  visible in the background)
The story of Turpin is the basis of the 1974 Carry On film Carry On Dick.  The role of Turpin was played by Sid James with other roles played by Barbara  Windsor, Hattie Jacques, Peter Butterworth, Kenneth Williams and Bernard  Bresslaw. It was one of the last Carry On films and with the exception of  Williams was the last to feature any of those listed stars. In this version,  Turpin hides behind the alter-ego of a church rector, giving it a connection to  another churchman-outlaw Doctor Syn.
In Terry Pratchett's and Neil Gaiman's comedy novel, Good Omens, one  of the characters names his car "Dick Turpin" because, he says, "wherever I go,  I hold up traffic".
The story is told in the English ballad turned folk-song "Turpin Hero", most  recently recorded by Colin Meloy of The Decemberists on the album Colin Meloy  Sings Shirley Collins.
Another folk-ballad on Turpin was written by Woody Guthrie, entitled "Unwelcome Guest", which depicts him in the vein of Robin Hood. It was recorded  by Billy Bragg and Wilco on the album Mermaid Avenue.
In the video game Armed and Dangerous there is a village called Dick  Turpin village.
Turpin is mentioned in the folk song "What I Want is a Proper Cup of  Coffee", as popularised by the band, Trout Fishing in America.
In the book Swan Song, by Brian Stableford (part of the Hooded Swan  series of books) the character Sam Parks was nicknamed Turpin because he'd  always had a desire to be a space pirate. Over the course of the book they make  a few other references to the story of Dick Turpin.
