Galloway denies quitting Respect | Politics | The Guardian
Galloway denies quitting Respect
Thursday 8 November 2007 09.20 EST
First published on Thursday 8 November 2007 09.20 EST
Share on Messenger
Close
George Galloway today denied claims he had quit his anti-war Respect party amid bitter infighting between rival factions of the organisation.
But as civil war erupted within the party and those opposed to Mr Galloway claimed to have been locked out of their offices during the dispute, the maverick MP confirmed he would be hosting a rival party conference on the same day as Respect's official gathering.
The move sparked a claim on the official Respect party website that Mr Galloway had split from the party - an allegation the MP's spokesman vehemently denies.
Speaking on Mr Galloway's behalf, John McKay told Guardian Unlimited: "It's not true [that Galloway has left the party]. The truth is that John Rees [Respect's national secretary] and crew, the SWP faction, are the ones that have split."
But Mr McKay confirmed that Mr Galloway was organising a rival party conference called Respect Renewal on the same day as the "official" Respect conference in London on November 17.
The MP's conference will take place in the City of London, while Respect's conference will be held at the University of Westminster.
Mr Rees said today that Mr Galloway's decision to set up a rival conference meant that he had left the party.
"I think under most people's definition that would be leaving an organisation," he said. "I think if the official Labour conference were taking place, and, for some reason, say Jack Straw decided to call his own conference on the same day, set up his own website, with a different name and his own email, people would assume that he had left the party."
Asked if Respect could continue without Mr Galloway, Mr Rees said: "There was always going to have to be a time when we would ... No matter how much of a contribution any individual makes to a political party, there is always a time when it has to continue without particular individuals and carry on."
He said that "very few" members had left over this dispute, and did not rule out standing as an MP himself in the future.
Respect - formed in 2004 as a coalition of Muslim and far-left groups opposed to the Iraq war - has in recent months become increasingly divided. Tension have arisen between Mr Galloway and a number of Muslim and anti-war supporters on the one hand, with a Socialist Workers party faction led by Mr Rees on the other.
The dispute seems to have moved up a gear since the autumn.
Last week, Respect claimed Mr Galloway's supporters had changed the locks on the party's national office in east London, which was shared between the party and the MP, leading Mr Rees to call on Mr Galloway to "reverse this disastrous course of action".
But Mr McKay said: "The locks have been changed because the parliamentary rules in terms of financing insist that the office can only be constituency office for the MP and it cannot be a party political office."
Meanwhile, on Mr Galloway's website, the former Labour MP and 26 supporters posted a statement claiming that "the actions of the SWP leadership imperil the very existence of Respect as a broad, pluralistic and democratic left alternative to New Labour".
The statement said that the conflict had escalated after Mr Galloway's attempts to introduce a new post of national organiser "to work alongside" Mr Rees, resulting in expulsions from the SWP and disputes over party personnel.
Mr Galloway is Respect's only MP. He was expelled from the Labour party in 2003 after making a series of anti-war comments.
He was elected to represent Bethnal Green and Bow in 2005 but will be standing in Poplar and Limehouse at the next election.
