Pictures of Fences | Types of Fences with Pictures
Types of Fences with Pictures
Menu
Different Kinds of Fences
When it comes to fencing there are hundreds of different kinds of fences made of different types of materials that serve specific purposes.  When you factor in all the different styles of fences and functions as well there are truly limitless amounts of fencing options available.  Below is a list of 20 different types of fences and a little bit of information about them.
This is an aluminum fence.  Aluminum fencing is strong, durable and mostly maintenance free.  It works great for enclosing a swimming pool area.
Aluminum fencing comes in different styles and different heights.  It also works great as a property border to fence in a backyard.  It’s strong enough that pets won’t chew threw it.
This is a picture of a bamboo privacy fence.  Most often, bamboo fencing comes in rolled panels and each bamboo pole is tied tight to the next one, creating a solid wall for privacy.
Bamboo fencing comes in artificial panels or natural bamboo panels in various different colors ranging from light to dark.  Bamboo fences add beauty to any backyard or landscape.
This is a photo of a chainlink fence.  These are often used at parks, baseball and softball fields and around powerplants and city properties.
Chainlink fencing is strong and durable yet less expensive than other metal fences. It comes in different grades and can be coated.  Vinyl coated chain link fencing typically comes in green or black.
This is a photo of an electric fence.  Electric fences come in different options using different types of hot wire.  The one shown also has a strand of barbed wire fence at the bottom.  Electric fences are typically used by farmers to keep livestock such as cattle inside a field.
Electric fence and hot wire fencing is typically easy to install and easy to repair.  It’s considered an inexpensive fence compared to other types of fencing that serve similar purposes.
Here’s a  picture of a beautiful flower garden fence.  Garden fences come in many forms but are typically made from wood or vinyl.
Historically, most horse fences were wooden fences.  But in recent years a lot of white vinyl horse fencing has surfaced as well.  Wooden fences are cheaper than vinyl but they require upkeep, repair and painting whereas vinyl fences do not.
Here’s a photo of a beautiful horse behind a four board black wooden horse fence.
Iron fencing has timeless beauty.  It comes in many different styles and shapes.  Wrought iron fences and ornamental iron fences are strong, durable and add safety and security to a property.
Here’s a picture of an iron fence between tall brick columns with concrete column caps.
Here’s a photo of a metal fence with a gate.  Metal fencing is durable but often requires painting over time.  It can also rust over time.
Here’s a picture of a black metal yard fence separating two lawns.
Here’s a picture of a beautiful white picket fence.  The white picket fence is the symbol of the American dream.  A picket fence with pretty landscaping can make any house look lovely.
Picket fencing can also be used as a border around yards.  Picket fences are usually made of wood or of white vinyl pvc.
Privacy fencing used to be predominantly wooden, but vinyl and plastic has become a big trend in recent years.  This pic is of a beautiful plastic backyard privacy fence.
Plastic fences don’t require painting and are virtually maintenance free.  They make excellent privacy fences enclosing swimming pool areas.
There are many different kinds of swimming pool fences.  Some are for privacy purposes and some are for safety purposes.  This is a metal safety fence.
Here’s another swimming pool safety fence to keep children and uninvited guests out of the pool area.
Here’s a picture of a beautiful wooden privacy fence, stained and water sealed.
Here’s another picture of a common wooden privacy fence.  These are typically tall with the boards touching each other so people can’t see inside.
Here’s a picture of a gorgeous PVC yard fence.
Here’s another picture of a PVC fence.  This one is a backyard privacy fence.
We will post more photos of different types of fences soon so check back for an update.
Split Rail Fence Pictures
Split rail fences have a Southern charm and are typically associated with country living.  Once a thing of the past, split rail fencing is now becoming a popular landscaping trend regardless of location.  You can choose to go with a traditional rustic fence or you can buy modern, treated fence posts and rails.
Split rail fences are not just for looks.  They are ideal for keeping in livestock or horses.
I’d like to start by showing you some of the more modern split rail fence photos.
These are what split rail fence posts look like if you buy them today.  They typically come in 2 hole posts or 3 hole posts.  Typically, the rail spacing is 16″ on center and the 3 hole posts are seven feet long and 2 hole posts are five feet nine inches long.  Line rails normally run about eleven feet long.
Here are what the split post rails look like.
An emerging trend is white split rail fencing.
The one in the picture is a corner unit.  One of the main elements of split rail fencing is the diagonal rails on typical corner units.
You can also spruce up your fence by adding a decorative gate like the one pictured below.
Or you can just use a more traditional gate like this one.
Often the wood used for split rail fencing is pine, but many people prefer cedar.
Here is a photo of a beautiful cedar split rail fence.
This is the older, more traditional looking type of fence I was referring to.  This type of fence is what most people envision when you say split rail fence.
The fence above can be found in the Smoky Mountains.  These fences were extremely popular in the Southern states.
Here’s another photo of some diagonal corner pieces.
As I mentioned in the beginning of this post, split rail fencing is often used for landscaping, but it is also widely used by farmers to keep livestock in and keep other animals out.
Below are a couple photos of split rail fencing with wire mesh attached to it.
I hope you’ve found this information useful and the pictures helpful.  If you have any questions about any type of fencing just let us know.
 
Installing a vinyl fence is a great option for people who want a low-maintenance fence that is still very sturdy and very beautiful.
Benefits of Vinyl Fences:
You don’t have to paint or stain vinyl fencing.
Rain won’t make your fence lose its color.
Vinyl fencing is very low-maintenance and easy to maintain.
Vinyl fences are very durable and last a long time.
Vinyl fences come in a variety of colors so you can still get the look you want without paint or stain.
The Downside to Vinyl Fences:
Even though vinyl is sturdy it is still a form of plastic and that leaves it vulnerable.
In colder climates vinyl fencing can become brittle due to the weather.
Options for repairing vinyl fences are few.  When damage occurs you have to repair the whole segment of damaged fence rather than being able to touch up individual pieces.
As you can see there are more pros than cons.
There are many different types and styles of vinyl fence.  Below are some photos of different kinds of vinyl fences as well as different colors.
Pictures of Vinyl Fences:
 
This is a picture of a white vinyl fence panel.  This particular panel has qualities of a picket fence as well as a privacy fence.  It has see through boards in the middle, thick columns with a decorative post tops on the outsides, a thick horizontal board on the bottom at almost ground level, and a thin horizontal board near the top.  This fence would look beautiful, keep things inside, keep things outside, and provide some level of privacy.
 
Here’s a photo of white vinyl fencing running around a subdivision.  The fence panels aren’t completely solid but do give a high degree of privacy and security.
 
Here’s a picture of a white vinyl privacy fence that surrounds this home’s entire yard.  The fence panels are solid with no cracks or light, making them very solid for privacy and security purposes.
 
Here’s a picture of a beautiful white vinyl picket fence.  The white picket fence is a symbol of The American Dream.  This particular vinyl picket fence features decorative post tops and a curved pattern for the individual vertical boards.
 
This fence is more expensive but is also more elegant.  Not only is it beautifully designed with high panels, curved panels and low panels that flow together to form an awesome fence, but it also is solid and tall, making it perfect for privacy and security.
All the pictures above have been of white fences, but vinyl fencing actually comes in many different color options.
 
Vinyl fence comes in white, ivory, khaki, beige, cedar, wood-grain, forest green, chestnut, tan, and black.  You may even be able to find more colors available through different fencing companies or manufacturers.
Here’s a picture of a beige vinyl fence.
 
Some people really like the durability of vinyl but the look of wood.  You can actually buy vinyl fence that looks like wood-grain.
 
As you can see from the image above, most people would think that fence was made out of wood even though it’s not.
Here’s another example.  You would never know this was made of vinyl without taking a closer look and feeling of the texture.
 
Fence gates are also available in vinyl.
 
 
This white vinyl fence gate is for a privacy fence.  It’s tall and sturdy with a decorative top and decorative post tops on the side panels.
As is the case with fence panels, vinyl gates also come in multiple color options.  Here is a tan colored gate.
 
I hope you’ve found this information useful and helpful and I hope that by looking at these images it’s given you a good idea about what type of vinyl fencing you want to get.  Please feel free to send in your own photos of your own fencing and if you’re a builder send us your prices for installation and your company information so we can list it on the site.
Chain Link Fence Pictures
Chain link fences come in all sizes and many colors.  They typically come in sheets of mesh square or diamond shapes.  They can be bought at Lowes, Home Depot, Tractor Supply Company, and many other stores.   Below are some pictures of chain link fences being used for many different purposes.  Hopefully the different designs and colors will give you some new ideas for your fencing project.
This first picture is of standard, residential mesh chain link fence.  This type of fence can be comprised of metal or aluminum.  It comes in sheets of the diamond shaped mesh, posts, clamps, bolts, etc.  You can buy the complete chain link fence kits for this type of fence at the stores I mentioned above.  This type of fence is very common and is fairly inexpensive.  It is also kind of blah.  Just using different colors can make the fence more appealing to look at.
Next is a picture of a black chain link fence. This one is much taller and has a nice gate in the middle of all the panels.
Here’s a picture of a green chain link fence.  I really like this color much more than the regular gray unpainted version and the black version.
You can find these type of fences around wildlife refuge’s, national parks, etc.
Next you’ll find a decorative chain link fence.  These designs are fairly new and are becoming more and more popular for residential purposes as well as for enclosing parks and playgrounds.
Next we have a picture of a security chain link fence.
This particular chain link fence has rolls of barbed wire at the top to prevent intruders from getting in and keep people from getting out.
Here is another chain link fence with extra security features added at the top.  These care commonly found at places like airports.
picture of chain link fence with barbed wire at the top
You can get all types of extra security added to the top if you wanted to, such as rolls of razor wire.  Those are commonly found on top of fences at prisons.
I hope now that you’ve seen all of these photos you can have some better design ideas and decide which type of chain link fence would be best for your project.
 
Pool Fence Pictures and Ideas
When it comes to fencing around your swimming pool area there are three main things that should be the most important.  The first is safety.  The second is appearance.  The third is cost.
Below are some pictures of pool fences ranging from wood, to metal, to wrought iron, to mesh plastic.  Hopefully these pictures will give you some ideas so you can build your own fence around your swimming pool exactly the way you want to do it.
First, let’s look at some child-proof safety fences.  I have this type of fence at my own house.  Basically we have an ornamental iron fence around the outskirts of the patio area with brick columns and iron rails.  But then we have another fence that just surrounds the pool itself.  The childproof fence is designed to bend and sway in such a way that children can’t climb under it and they can’t climb over it.  It’s very durable and flexible.  It comes in sections that hook together.  Installation was much easier than I ever expected.  Below are some pictures.
This type of child-proof pool fence can come in all custom sizes.  When installing you simply drill holes in the ground where each post will screw into.  With a simple stick and twist motion each post locks into place.
As you can see from this close up picture above, the child-proof fence is made of a vinyl and plastic material in a mesh pattern.  At the top of each pole there is a hook that connects the poles.  It’s very easy to take down sections of the fence.  That’s an option you don’t have with metal or wrought iron fences.  It’s also easy to take the whole fence down and store.  I often take mine down certain times of the year.  It only takes about ten minutes to disassemble and only about 15 minutes to put it back up again.
Above is another view of a standard baby-proof mesh pool safety fence.
Here is the same type of pool fence but in a beige color.  It comes in black, white or beige.   There are many advantages of this type of pool fence.  The first is safety.  The second benefit is convenience.  The third benefit is appearance.  The mesh panels are made in such a way that you can hardly see them.  They almost look invisible, giving you a great view of your pool.
Speaking of invisible pool fences, the photo above is of a plexi-glass pool fence.  The plastic panels are very similar to glass except they are shatter proof and not breakable.  The big advantage of this kind of pool fence is you can see through it and get a great view of the pool.  Since the fence is solid it also helps keep debris out of your pool better than most fences.  The downside of a fence like this is that it tends to get dirty easily and needs to be cleaned often.  While we’re at it, notice the awesome concrete privacy fence in the background.
Here’s a photo of a standard metal pool fence.  This type of pool fence is very strong and durable but often needs painting after a few years.  They tend to rust a bit over time if not maintained.  These fences look pretty and are a deterant for kids but they won’t keep kids out like the mesh safety fences will.  They also don’t keep debris out very well.  Leaves, dirt, grass, and bugs easily make their way through the rails of the fence and into the pool.
Here is an image of a decorative metal pool fence.  This fence is extra tall to keep people out and has a great design with arches at the top and decorative post tops between fence panels.  These type of fences are available in metal as well as wrought iron.
Here’s a photo of a standard wrought iron pool fence.  These need to be painted about every five years to prevent rusting, but they are very durable and will last a very long time.
Aboe is a photo of a wrought iron pool fence with a decorative gate.  This is a simple design but very beautiful and elegant.
Here’s a close up image of an ornamental wrought iron pool fence.  You basically have regular wrought iron and then you have “ornamental” wrought iron when the rails or posts are decorative.  This one has spear tip vertical rails and rounded post tops.  The pattern is very beautiful and sophisticated looking.
This iron pool fence pictured above is painted white.  It matches all the decor around the pool area and is very elegant.  The pool gate has an arched top to give it a little extra pizzazz.  It’s a good alternative if you want to be different from everybody else who tends to have black fences only.
I hope these pictures of pool fences in different designs and made of different materials has given you some new ideas you hadn’t thought of before.  When designing your pool area layout it’s a big advantage if you think far enough ahead to figure out what kind of pool fence you’re going to have.  It can make a big difference asthetically and can even increase the value of your home.  The better it looks the more it is worth if you ever decide to sell.  Plus, you’ll just be happier the better it looks.  Hanging out in a beautiful pool area makes everyone in a better mood and a happier person.
Privacy Fence Pictures
The following pictures are of wooden privacy fences.  These types of fences can be used for pool areas, property lines, or any other place where you want to keep others out and not allow them to see in.
This is a picture of a standard wood privacy fence in someone’s back yard.  This fence sets on the property line and separates the homeowner’s property from the house right beside them.
This wooden privacy fence is much more elequant and features a great pattern of horizontal and vertical panels as well as decorative post tops.  It not only provides privacy for this pool area but it looks fantastic as well.
Here’s another wooden privacy fence design.  This one uses curves at the top with an upside down arc shape at the top which looks like wavs.  It also has decorative post tops.
Here’s a picture of a patterned wooden privacy fence.  Each panel has checkered boards from top to bottom.
I really like the wood fence design above.  The design is similar to a wicker basket with each board weaving in and out.  It makes for the best looking wooden fence I have seen so far.
Here is a beautiful privacy fence made of cedar planks.  Not only does it look gorgeous but it smells great too.  This fence has decorative post tops as well.
This privacy fence has vertical wooden board panels with columns made of stones.  It also features a hedgerow as well.
I hope these pictures of wooden privacy fences designs have given you some ideas for your fencing project.  More pics will be posted soon so please check back often.
 
Types of Fences
Fences come in all shapes, sizes, and types.  There are more kinds of fences than you probably think.  If you are considering installing a new fence you should probably take a step back and consider all types of fences and try to figure out exactly what kind you actually need.  The first step is to identify the purpose of the fence.  What will it be used for?  Once that is established you should consider the following:
What is the lifespan of the fence?
Will you be installing the fence yourself or will you need a professional installation?
Will the fence have a warranty?
What will maintenance of the fence cost?
How often will the fence need to be repaired?
How much will it cost to build the fence?
What level of privacy will the fence have?
Will the fence be residential or commercial?
What will the fence look like?
What pattern will the fence be in?
Once you’ve answered those questions you should be ready to move on and decide what the fence will be made of.  The main types of fences are the following:
Wood Fences
Aluminum Fences
Wrought Iron Fences
Those listed above are the primary types.  However, there are endless types of fences and uses for fencing.  Below is a list of 20 kinds of fences and what they actually are, as well as what they are used for.
20 Types of Fences
Agricultural fences – Farmers use agricultural fences to keep predators away from their livestock and to keep their livestock from getting out, getting lost, or causing damage.  Agricultural fences include wooden fences, wire fences, and electric fences.
Privacy Fences – Privacy fencing is used anywhere people want to keep others from seeing in.  Privacy fences types often include perimeter fences.
Boundary Fences – These are typically used to show exact property lines.
Pet Fences – These are used to keep animals inside the yard or within the property.  Pet fences can be woven wire, wood, or electric.  They even have invisible electric fences now that are activated by the collars the pets wear.
Pool Fences – These fences usually go around the outskirts of the pool area.  Ornamental wrough iron or metal fences are commonly used.  Brick columns can be a form of fence for pool areas as well.  Pool fences can also be used to keep debris out of the pool area, and more importantly, to keep kids out of the pool area when not supervised.  There are fences made of plastic and vinyl which are designed to bend without breaking, thus, preventing people from climbing over or under the fence.
Chain-Link Fences – chain link fencing is wire woven together.
Concrete Fences – These are fences where concrete is poured in such a manner that it hardens into the shape of a fence.
Close Board Fences – These are very strong fences made from feather edge boards, morticed posts and arris rails.
Sunken Fences  – This type of fence is also known as a “Ha Ha Fence” since it is sunken into the ground.
Hurdle Fences – Sections of hurdle fences can be removed.
Post and Rail Fences – These are very common.  Basically, as the name indicates, they are made from digging a hole, erecting posts, and then inserting rails between the posts.
Roundpole Fences – As the name suggests, these are just made from round poles as opposed to square poles.
Slate Fences – Vertical slates are wired together to make fence panels.
Spear Top Fences – The tops of the posts are pointed like a spear tip.
Picket Fences – Most people think of white picket fences infront of houses as part of the American Dream.  Picket fences are typically two to three feet tall and are most commonly used for landscaping around flower gardens or propertly lines.
Stockade Fences  – These are very similar to the picket fences, but they are much taller and the individual sections are close together.  These are used for privacy.
Vinyl Fences – These are beautiful.  The big advantage to using vinyl fencing is that you don’t have to paint it and you don’t have to replace it very often.  The posts and rail last for long periods of time and usually come with good warranties.
Split-Rail Fences – You can see a lot of these in country areas.  These are decorative fences made of wood or timber and stacked in a zig-zag pattern.
Live Fences  – Hedges and hedgerows are often used to create live fences.  It takes a lot of pruning, trimming and maintenance to maintain a live fence, but they are inexpensive and can be a beautiful addition to any landcaping project.  Hedges aren’t the only type of live fence.  You can also make fences out of cactus and shrubs.
Wire Fences –  Wire fencing comes in all kinds of varieties.  Electric fences are wire fences.  So are barbed wire fences, woven wire fences, chicken wire fences, and welded wire mesh fences.  Wire fences are often used for agricultural purposes to protect livestock, to keep pets in, and to keep predators out.
Now that we’ve told you all about the many different types of fences and what they are used for, we will show you what they look like by providing pictures of as many types as possible.  Once you know what they are and what they look like the only thing left is for you to make a decision of which kind you want to install.  Then you’ll need to know where to buy the fences themselves or where to buy the fence parts so you can install them yourself.
