Craignure: Things to Do - TripAdvisor
Want the lowest hotel prices? You're in the right place. We check 200+ sites for you.
Craignure: Things to Do
Review a place you’ve visited
JOIN
We'll send you updates with the latest deals, reviews and articles for Craignure each week.
Craignure Traveller Article:
Comments (1)
Craignure is where you will arrive after your 45 minute ferry crossing from Oban.  It is a small village which is VERY friendly - especially on a good night in the Craignure Inn!  It's the ideal centre to stay if you're visiting Mull as it is central on the island.  Perfect location for people who don't have a car.  The buses come to meet some of the ferries and will transport you to Tobermory at the north end of the island and Fionnphort at the south (the place to get your ferry if you're planning a trip to Iona). But check the bus timetables to see which ferries are met!
 Craignure itself has Arlene's Cafe - a must for homemade cakes, soup, etc. a Spar shop (very expensive) with a petrol station , a post office,  Tourist Information Centre, Caledonian MacBrayne office for buying those all important ferry tickets, the aforementioned Craignure Inn which does good pub grub at reasonable prices and has live music every Saturday night during the summer season - this can be anything from traditional Scottish music to pop to people playing didgeridoos and harps!    There is a narrow gauge railway which takes you on a 20 minute trip along to Torosay Castle which is open to the public and has 12 acres of gardens.  You can also walk to this castle along the forest walk which gives nice views to Ben Nevis.  Not far from the castle is the Wings Over Mull bird of prey centre.  Further along the bay is Duart Castle, the home of the clan Maclean.  Both castles have tea rooms and gift shops.
 If you are a walker or a cyclist then there is plenty for you to discover.
There is a golf course one mile outside the village where visitors are welcome, just put your money in the honesty box.  Clubs can be hired in the village if required.
There are plenty of wildlife trips to go on, both on land and on the sea.  They can all be booked at the Tourist Office and most (if not all) will pick you up from Craignure.
 You can also book a trip to the famous Eagle Hide to view a pair of nesting white tailed eagles - booking at the Tourist Office and is essential.
There is a large camp site, whch unfortunately has let quite a few of it's facilities "lapse" over the last few years.  If you are going to book to stay there I suggest you ask specifically about anything you may have seen in it's brochure.
There are not many bed and breakfasts so early booking is to be recommended.  Look on the Visit Scotland website for full details.  (one  is called Linnhe View!)
Red deer regularly wander through the village (and come into the gardens and eat the flowers!
Otters live under the pier and seals and dolphins are sometimes seen.  Grasspoint is 2 miles away and there you will see nesting White Tailed Sea Eagles.  Golden Eagles are sometimes seen flying over the village.
Craignure has beautiful views and glorious sunrises and sunsets.
At certain times of the year you can see the Aurora Borealis (Northern Lights).  The best sightings are usually in February.  It's probably best to check a specialist website to see if they can give any hints about when there will be solar activity.
Share your knowledge
