Kim Wilde Net Worth - Get Kim Wilde Net Worth
Kim Wilde Net Worth
Kim Wilde Net Worth is$8 million
VN:F [1.9.22_1171]
Rating: 4.6/5 (9 votes cast)
VN:F [1.9.22_1171]
?
Rating: 5.0/5 (6 votes cast)
Kim Wilde is a singer/songwriter, author and television presenter with the net worth of $6 million. Kim Wilde has earned her net worth with her recordings, song compositions and as the author of two books on landscaping entitled "Gardening with Children" and "The First-Time Gardner" as well as her advertising jobs for health food shop "Holland and Barrett" and green kitchens for "Magnet." Wilde's first single was released in the UK and hit the number 2 best singles list. The song was written by her father Marty Wilde and her brother Ricky Wilde. In 1980 Kim Wilde signed a contract with RAK Record Company and in 1981 released her first album "Kim Wilde" which was also successful. After that she preceded to have several hit singles and albums. Her first big hit in the U.S. was "You Keep Me Hangin' On" which was originally recorded by the Motown group The Supremes.  Wilde left RAK and signed with MCA in 1984. In 1986 Wilde wrote and co-wrote most of the songs on her album "Another Step" and with her rendition of "You Keep Me Hangin' On" (the second single on the album) she gained recognition in the United States with the song hitting number one in 1987. Wilde has had several hit singles and albums in Belgium, UK, France, Germany, Australia, the U.S. and other countries as well. She has also made a name for herself in the landscaping business with offers to design for the program "Better Gardens" and had a two year contract with "Garden Invaders," a BBC series. Wilde was given the birth name of Kim Smith and was born in Chiswick, Middlesex, England in 1960. Her parents were Marty Wilde (a 50's rock and roll singer whose given name was Reginald Smith) and Joyce Baker (belonged to singing and dance group The Vernons.) Kim Wilde attended Oakfield Preparatory School in Dulwich, Tewin in Hertfordshire and Presdales School in Ware. She also went to St. Albans College of Art and Design.  She has two brothers, Ricky and Marty Jr. and one sister, Roxanne.  Ricky and Roxanne are involved in the music industry and brother, Marty Jr. is a landscape gardener. Kim Wilde married Hal Fowler and has two children together, Harry Tristan and Rose Elisabeth.
Kim Wilde (born Kim Smith, 18 November 1960) is an English pop singer, author and television presenter who burst onto the music scene in 1981 with the number 2 UK Singles Chart New Wave classic "Kids in America". In 1983, Wilde received the Brit Award for Best British Female. In 1987 she had a major hit in the US when her version of The Supremes' classic "You Keep Me Hangin' On" topped the charts. Starting in 1998, while still active in music, she has branched into an alternative career as a landscape gardener.
The eldest child of 1950s rock 'n' roller Marty Wilde (birth name Reginald Smith) and Joyce Baker, who was earlier a member of the singing and dancing group The Vernons Girls, Kim Smith was born in the West London suburb of Chiswick and attended Oakfield Preparatory School, in the Southeast London area of Dulwich. When she was nine, the family moved to Hertfordshire, where she was educated at Tewin and later Presdales School in Ware. In 1980, at age 20, she completed a foundation course at St Albans College of Art & Design and, as Kim Wilde, was signed to RAK Records by Mickie Most.
Wilde released her debut single "Kids in America" in January 1981. An instant success, it reached number two in the UK Singles Chart and scaled the Top 5 in other countries such as Germany, France and Australia. Although it achieved only moderate success in the US, peaking at number 25 when released in 1982, it is often regarded today as Wilde's signature song. Her debut album Kim Wilde repeated the success of the single, spawning two further hits in "Chequered Love" (Top 5 in the UK, France, Australia and Germany) and the UK-only single "Water on Glass". Her follow-up album was 1982's Select, led by the hit singles "Cambodia" and "View From a Bridge". Both were Number 1 hits in France and reached Top 10 positions in Germany and Australia. At the time, there was some controversy about Wilde's hesitation to do live concerts. Her first concerts in September 1982 took place in
Kim Wilde Net Worth, 4.6 out of 5 based on 9 ratings
Kim Wilde Latest News
