Jackson Pollock Paintings
Store
Jackson Pollock Paintings
Jackson Pollock paintings are some of the most recognisable and thrilling images produced in the 20th century.  Pollock was  dubbed ‘Jack the Dripper’ by Time magazine due to the unusual way he liked to drip and splatter paint onto his  canvas.   Some of the inspiration for his paintings came from the Native American sand art he saw as a child  and his own method of working resembled a form of ritualised dance around the  canvas which was laid out flat on the floor.
One, No. 31
View at Art.com
Early Years
Jackson Pollock was born in  Cody, Wyoming in January 1912, the youngest of five brothers, and grew up in  Arizona and California.  He went to  school at the Manual Arts High School in California and at the age of 18, moved  to New York City to study under the American Regionalist painter, Thomas Hart  Benton, at the Art Students’ League.  The  main subject matter for his work during this period was the life in rural  America he had known as a boy.  During  the 1930s, Pollock was relatively unknown and struggled to survive during the  years of the Depression.   He succeeded  in getting a place on the Federal Art Project which gave him a small income and  enabled him to continue painting. 
Key Influences
Image From Art.com
In 1936 Pollock took part in  the Experimental Workshop run by the Mexican muralist, David Alfaro Siquieros  who encouraged the splattering, hurling and dripping of paint and who  introduced Pollock to the idea of ‘controlled accident’.  The dripping and pouring method of painting  adopted by Pollock in the 1940s also had roots in Surrealist automatism of that  time, a technique which enabled the unconscious mind to express itself  freely.  Pollock  also said of his work that it was ‘akin to  the method of the Indian sand painters of the West’ , a reference to the  American Indian custom of making sand paintings on the floor as part of a  religious ritual.  Pollock borrowed ideas  from all three sources to develop his own radical style of painting.
Moving Forward
In 1942, Pollock had a  breakthrough when he exhibited a painting at the McMillen Gallery in New York  alongside artists such as Picasso, Bonnard and Braque and the young American  artist, Lee Krasner .  Krasner introduced  Pollock to a wider art scene which then led to an introduction to Peggy  Guggenheim who had just opened the Art of This Century Gallery.  She liked his work and offered him a  contract.
Untitled, Jackson Pollock
Image From Art.com
In 1945, Pollock married Lee Krasner and they  moved to a farmhouse on Long Island where he continued to develop his radical  style of painting.  In 1947 he discarded  the paint brush and began the process of dripping and pouring the paint from  the can or from a stick directly onto a canvas spread on the floor.  These Jackson Pollock paintings, he said, had ‘no  beginning and no end’.  Films made in the  early 1950s show Pollock engaged in a ritualised dance around the canvas. 
Celebrity Artist
Jackson Pollock  paintings executed by the "drip" method established  his reputation.  By the late 1940s,  Pollock was a major celebrity and was featured in Time and Life magazines.  Time magazine dubbed him ‘Jack the Dripper’ and Life  magazine, albeit  somewhat cynically, ran the headline ‘Is this the greatest living painter in  the United States?’  This exposure turned  Pollock into a household  name and, for  the general public, he symbolised what was incomprehensible yet hugely exciting  about modern art. 
Number 1, 1950 (Lavender Mist), 1950, oil, enamel and aluminum on canvas by Jackson Pollock by cliff1066 T, on Flickr
Final Years
Pollock abandoned his drip  style in 1951 and began to paint more figuratively again but his painting  output started to decline and then ceased altogether.  He held his last one-man show in 1954.
He was a hard-drinker all his  life and had a tendency to live recklessly.  He began an affair in 1956 which led to  separation from his wife.  On 10 August  1956, he was killed instantly when the car he was driving crashed on the road  near his home.  Another passenger in the  car also died but his girlfriend survived.
Breaking The Ice
Willem de Kooning said of  Pollock, ‘he broke the ice’, meaning that he was part of something  that brought about the recognition of  Abstract Expressionist artists and created  a market for their work.  Shortly after Pollock’s death, his painting, Autumn Rhythm was sold to the  Metropolitan Museum for $30,000.  This  was unprecedented for an abstract work and had a knock-on effect on the prices  dealers could command for the work of the other Abstract Expressionists.  As Pollock’s dealer Sidney Janis recalled  later, ‘we had a little less trouble selling a de Kooning for $10,000 than we  had a month earlier trying to sell one for $5,000.’
In late 1956, The Museum of  Modern Art held a memorial retrospective of Pollock’s work comprising  thirty-five Jackson Pollock paintings and nine watercolours and drawings from  1938-1956.
 
Sign Up!
Keep up to date with the latest news and views on abstract art by signing up for our monthly e-zine
Sign Up
