A History of Punishments
Among the Aztecs children were punished by having cactus needles forced into their skin.
Cane
Until the late 20th century teachers were allowed to hit children. In the 16th century boys were often punished by being hit with birch twigs. In the 19th century hitting boys (and girls) with a bamboo cane became popular. In the 20th century the cane was used in both primary and secondary schools. However in the late 1960s and early 1970s the cane was abolished in most primary schools. In England in 1987 the cane was abolished in state-funded secondary schools. It was abolished in private schools in 1999.
Cangue
This was a Chinese punishment. It was a wooden board locked around the prisoners neck. He could not reach his mouth with his arms and so could not feed himself or drink without help.
Cold Shower
In the 20th century in some schools forcing a child to have a cold shower was used as a punishment.
Crank
The crank was a handle that convicts had to turn again and again. Normally the prisoner had to turn the handle thousands of times before he could eat. It was hard and very monotonous work. The crank was abolished in British prisons in 1898.
Crucifixion
The condemned man carried the cross beam of the cross to the site of execution. His arms were tied or nailed to it and the crosspiece was tied or nailed to a pole. Under the persons feet was a block of wood to make sure their weight did not tear their hands from the nails. The person's feet were also nailed to the cross. To add to the person's suffering they experienced thirst in the hot sun and their sweat attracted flies and other insects.
Death was eventually caused by asphyxiation as it became more and more difficult to breathe. Death could take days although sometimes it was hastened by breaking the person's legs. Crucifixion was banned in the Roman Empire in 337 AD.
Drowning
Although drowning is an obvious method of killing people it was seldom used as a method of execution. The Roman writer Tacitus said that the Germanic peoples drowned cowards in fens under piles of sticks. The Anglo-Saxons also sometimes used drowning as a punishment. In the Middle Ages drowning was sometimes used to punish murder. In England in the 13th century it was enacted that anybody who committed murder on the king's ships would be tied to their victims body and thrown into the sea to drown.
In Portsmouth at that time male murderers were burned but female murderers were tied to a post in the harbor and left to drown when the tide came in.
Drowning was occasionally used in Europe through the following centuries. It was revived in the French Revolution in Nantes by a man named Jean Baptiste Carrier as a convenient way of killing large numbers of people. They were loaded into vessels with trapdoors, which were then sunk.
Ducking Stool
The ducking stool was a seat on a long wooden arm. Women who were convicted of being scolds or gossips were tied to the seat then ducked into the local pond or river. The last woman to be ducked in England suffered the punishment in 1809. In 1817 another woman was sentenced to be ducked but fortunately the water level was too low so she escaped being immersed.
In a later variation of the ducking school in early 19th century textile mills lazy children sometimes had their heads ducked in a container of water.
Dunce's Cap
In the 19th century low-ability children were often humiliated by being forced to wear a conical hat with a 'D' on it. It was called a dunce's cap.
Electric Chair
In the late 19th century it occurred to people that electricity could be used to kill. It was first used in the USA in 1890 when a man named William Kemmler was executed. Unfortunately his death was not quick. Nevertheless the electric chair became a popular method of execution in the USA. The first woman executed in the electric chair was Martha Place in 1899.
Fines
Forcing people to pay money is an obvious method of punishment and it has been used since Ancient Times.
Firing Squad
Firing squads became common once guns were accurate enough. However firing squads were usually used as a military not a civilian punishment. Yet in the USA Gary Gilmore was famously executed by firing squad in 1977.
Flogging
Flogging has been a common punishment since ancient times. Jesus was flogged before he was crucified. In England from the Middle Ages whipping was a common punishment for minor crimes. In the 18th century whipping or flogging was a common punishment in the British army and navy. However it was abolished in 1881.
Garroting
Garroting was a form of strangulation. Often it was carried out using a metal collar attached to a post, which was tightened around the person's neck. Garroting was once used in Spain.
Gas Chamber
The gas chamber was first used in the USA in 1924. The condemned person is strapped to a chair in a sealed room, which is then filled with cyanide gas. After their death powerful fans remove the gas.
Grampussing
In the days of sailing ships a punishment for minor offences was to tie a sailors hands above his head and pour buckets of water down his sleeves. By Napoleonic times this was known as grampussing because the man made a noise like a grampus, a sea mammal.
Guillotine
The French Revolution is notorious for its use of the guillotine. In fact mechanical devices for beheading people had been used in various parts of Europe for centuries before the French Revolution. (One was recorded in Ireland as early as 1307).
Joseph-Ignace Guillotin (1738-1814) proposed that there should be a swift and humane method of executing people in France. The French Assembly agreed to his idea in 1791 and the first decapitating device was built by a man named Tobias Schmidt, with advice from a surgeon named Antoine Louis. The first person to be executed by the new machine was Nicolas Jacques Pelletier in 1792.
The guillotine was last used in France in 1977. The French abolished capital punishment in 1981.
Hanging
Hanging was a very common method of execution in England from Saxon times until the 20th century.
At first the criminal stood on a ladder, which was pulled away, or on a cart, which was moved. From the 18th century he stood on a trapdoor. Sometimes the hanged man broke his neck when he fell but until the 19th century he was usually strangled by the rope.
The last public hanging in Britain took place in 1868. The last woman to be hanged in Britain was Ruth Ellis in 1955. The last people to be hanged in Britain were two men who were hanged on the same day in 1964. In Britain the death penalty for murder was abolished for an experimental period of 5 years in 1965. It was abolished permanently in 1969.
Hanging, drawing and quartering
This was the punishment in England for treason. The man was drawn on a hurdle pulled by a horse to the place of execution. He was hanged (strangled by being suspended by a rope) but when he was still alive and sometimes conscious he was cut down. The executioner cut open his stomach and 'drew out' his entrails. Finally the man was beheaded and his body was cut into quarters.
However the full sentence was last carried out in 1782. The law was changed in 1814. Afterwards the man was hanged until he was dead and then beheaded. He was not disemboweled. The last case was in 1820. However hanging, drawing and quartering was not formally abolished until 1870.
Hard Labor
Prisoners could be sentenced to hard physical work as well as imprisonment. However hard labor was abolished in Britain in 1948.
Horse
This was an old military punishment. The prisoner was made to sit on a wooden 'horse' with his legs either side and his arms tied behind his back. Weights were tied to his legs.
Hulks
Before 1776 prisoners from Britain were sometimes transported to the North American colonies. However in that year the colonies rebelled so the British government began to use old ships as prisons. They were called hulks. From 1787 prisoners were transported to Australia but prisoners were often held on hulks before they were transported. During the Napoleonic Wars French prisoners of war were also held on hulks. Hulks were abolished in 1857.
Inhalation of Smoke
In Aztec society naughty children were sometimes punished by having their head held over a fire containing chilies and being forced to inhale the smoke.
Jougs
This was an old Scottish punishment. A metal collar, which was secured to a wall with a chain, was fastened around the criminals neck.
Keel Hauling
This was first recorded in the 16th century. In the Dutch navy keelhauling meant dropping a man into the sea then hauling him under the keel of the ship with a rope. Barnacles would cut his skin to shreds and there was the possibility of drowning.
Lethal Injection
Lethal injection was first used as a method of execution in the USA in 1982. It has since become the most common method of execution in that country.
Lock-up
