Lilo and Stitch (Disney film) - All The Tropes
We have many pages linking to disambiguation lists instead of to the articles they should point to. (How many? Over Forty-Nine Thousand! ) If you have time, please clean up a page or two.
Miraheze has adopted a new Terms of Service , Privacy Policy ,         and Content Policy (for wiki administrators) .         The Terms of Service and Privacy Policy apply to all users of Miraheze wikis, so please read.
Keep on editing, and have a happy new year!
Lilo and Stitch (Disney film)
Everything About Fiction You Never Wanted to Know.
Get your own trope!
"Ohana means family. Family means nobody gets left behind, or forgotten."
Entry #42 in the Disney Animated Canon , this 2002, 2-D animated film was critically acclaimed when it came out, though its box office performance suffered due to competition with Minority Report and the Live Action Adaptation of Scooby Doo . Set mainly in the lush Hawaiian island of Kauai, this movie was a significant breakaway for Disney on many counts, including an unconventional protagonist, "inter-STITCH-al" trailers, the lack of a real villain and the score drawn from home-grown Hawaiian songs and artists - and, of course, Elvis. Unlike other Disney animated films, Disney was hands-off the creative development and did not interfere with the story- director Chris Sanders wanted the film to reflect his own drawing style, and he wrote the entire draft along with his directing partner Dean DeBlois.
Recent orphans of a car accident , sisters Nani and Lilo are practically alone in the world except for each other. Lilo, often lost in her own world , neither understands nor is understood by her hula classmates, and Nani, trying to be responsible , wants to strangle Lilo about as often as hug her. Unbeknownst to them, Dr. Jumba Jookiba, the maddest scientist to splice genetics this side of the Milky Way , stands trial for having created, illegally, a new life form (actually 626 life forms, but it is the 626th that we're concerned with). Stitch has a vast capacity for knowledge, spectacular combat abilities, and a programmed instinct to destroy anything he comes across. Escaping from the United Galactic Federation, Stitch takes a shortcut to the closest planet, which is 70% water (important because he is too dense to swim) - and miraculously lands on the bitty archipelago in the middle of the Pacific, the island of Kauai. He adopts Lilo as readily as Lilo adopts him; however, while Lilo wants a companion, Stitch wants a human shield to deter Dr. Jumba, who is hot on his trail, with the help of neurotic Agent Pleakley. However, Stitch inadvertently learns the meaning of 'ohana: " Ohana means family . Family means, no one gets left behind or forgotten ." In other words, True Companions .
The film was both a massive critical and financial success - Stitch quickly skyrocketed into being one of the most popular characters in the Disney Animated Canon , and it launched the directorial career of Chris Sanders and Dean De Blois, who get a bit of Creator Worship for both this film and Dreamworks' How to Train Your Dragon , as well as engendering some bitterness towards John Lasseter when he fired them from Disney . The film is well-remembered and well-loved for being almost like a Studio Ghibli film in how it deftly mixes humor, strangeness and tear-jerking moments into one cohesive whole - as a matter of fact, Japan loves Stitch . He may even be more popular in Japan than Mickey Mouse himself .
The idea of 625 other experiments by Jumba was inevitably too tempting not to develop into Lilo and Stitch: The Series . A few episodes crossed over with Kim Possible , The Proud Family , Recess , and American Dragon: Jake Long . This series was bookended by Stitch! The Movie, a direct-to-video film which kicked it off and Leroy & Stitch, another DTV film that acted as the finale for the series.
During the creation of the series another DTV film was made. This one was called Lilo and Stitch 2: Stitch Has A Glitch. This movie takes place shortly after the original film, effectively acting as a direct sequel, and before Stitch! The Movie. In it, we discover that Stitch was never fully charged during his creation and suffers fits that revert him to his original programming. Unless he is recharged, he will shut down permanently. Lilo and Stitch 2 was originally slated for a theatrical release, but the poor returns from Jungle Book 2 made Disney reconsider just as the movie was complete and had it released straight to video. The fact that none of the other experiments are mentioned nor Gantu is shown as well as the high production values make this pretty obvious that it was meant to be theatrical. Also included on the DVD was a short film, The Origin of Stitch, which also takes place before Stitch! The Movie.
Stitch's habit of sneaking into other shows and platforms resulted not just in the movie's teaser trailers, but also in a short cameo in The Lion King 1/2 and a role in the Kingdom Hearts video game series.
An Anime series, Stitch! , has been made for the Japanese market and began airing in October of 2008, featuring the new protagonist Yuna. The series established itself as a Time Skip from the original franchise in a 2011 episode where Stitch reunites with an adult Lilo. It began airing on Disney XD in North America on October 24, 2011.
Tropes used in Lilo and Stitch (Disney film) include:
Contents
Author Vocabulary Calendar : "Abomination!"
Used to draw early parallels between Lilo and Stitch; both have the word abomination applied to them early on (Stitch by the Galactic Councilwoman, and Lilo hypothetically by herself). The two "Does this look infected to you?" lines serve a similar purpose.
Related to: Fantastic Racism against genetically engineered lifeforms. See Inspector Javert below.
Berserk Button : Calling Lilo crazy or bringing up her dead mom in disparaging conversation. In the second case she gets so mad not even Stitch bothers to stop her.
Big Bad : The most unique variant on this from Disney - the character closest to this role is the Grand Councilwoman, who is the Big Good of the whole galaxy.
Bilingual Bonus : Lilo has a sign on her door that says "Kapu," which is Hawaiian for "forbidden" (related to the word "taboo")
Blatant Lies : During Jumba's trial when he denies creating new lifeforms. --> "I would never ever" (Stitch is presented as evidence) " ...make more than one! "
Bluffing the Advance Scout : At the end it's revealed that Cobra did this.
"Saved the planet once: convinced an alien race that mosquitos were an endangered species."
Lilo: (On the phone) "Hello, Cobra Bubbles? Aliens are attacking my house."
Catch Phrase : "Ohana means family. And family means no one gets left behind ...or forgotten."
Cel Shading : All the spacecrafts and automobiles in the film.
Chainsaw Good : "Oh, it's okay now. My dog found the chainsaw." Though Stitch is stopped before he gets to use it.
Chekhov's Gun : When Lilo and Nani first 'buy' Stitch at the animal shelter Lilo receives a certificate with a stamp on it stating that Stitch is now hers for two dollars. While this is not truly important at the time, it turns out that that certificate becomes the only reason why Lilo gets to keep Stitch since it would be considered stealing if the Councilwoman takes him away from his owner. Good thing she had it conveniently in her favorite mumu, huh? In Cobra Bubbles' own words, "Aliens are all about rules."
Cobra gives his card to Lilo when they first meet, she calls him when she's being attacked by aliens.
Clark Kenting : Stitch, who is believed to be a dog (although a lot of people are incredulous, and Nani notes that he looks more like "an evil koala"), and more notably Jumba and Pleakley masquerading as humans. Could be related to Weirdness Censor .
It could also be related to people being too polite to bring up the fact that Jumba and Pleakley look like deformed people. When Nani worries about how "swollen" Pleakley's head is and Jumba casually says "Actually, she's just ugly", Nani looks rather uncomfortable.
Come Back, My Pet : Lilo tells Stitch to go away after she discovers that he's an alien, and that he's the reason that they were being pursued by Jumba and Pleakley. Right after, however, she gets captured by Gantu, and Stitch rescues her.
Contrived Coincidence : Stitch lands on a small island in the middle of the ocean with no large cities; this renders about 90% of his destructive programming moot. Lilo gives it an unwitting Lampshade Hanging .
It's lampshaded even earlier by the Genre Savvy Grand Councilwoman with a very deadpanned "of course".
Creator Cameo : Chris Sanders voices Stitch in all animated incarnations of the character, except for the anime. This includes Kingdom Hearts: Birth By Sleep , which was released a few years after he left Disney for Dreamworks Animation .
Creepy Changing Painting : A fairly mellow version. As a Freeze-Frame Bonus , a poster in Nani's room has a surprised expression for a few frames after Stitch hits Jumba with a VW Beetle .
Cut His Heart Out with a Spoon
Did Not Do the Research : Cobra is "the one they call when things go wrong", meaning that Social Services is already on Nani. After her horrible performance as a guardian, there is no way a social agent would give her some more time - not even hours. Cobra should have taken Lilo with him for her own security, principally to avoid Nani kidnapping her or worse.
Cobra's a nice guy who could tell that Nani meant the best. He probably fudged the paperwork, hoping that she'd adapt to the role.
The Dog Is an Alien : Stitch pretends to be a dog despite looking more like a blue koala.
Fan Service : David is a Walking Swimsuit Scene .
The Federation : United Galactic Federation or Alliance depending on the movie/episode.
Though given that they would have destroyed Earth if not for mosquitoes supposedly being an endangered species, they have at least some traits of The Empire as well.
Flight, Strength, Heart : Stitch has super strength, a super-retentive brain (can learn any language, alien, human, or otherwise, in a very brief time period), agility, quick thinking -- he's created to be a being of mass destruction . He can also act as a gramophone (stick a claw on a vinyl disc, open Stitch's mouth, and swing to the Elvis). And perfectly regurgitate a cake he just ate.
Free-Range Children : Lilo is about six years old, yet she runs about Hawaii with Stitch, and no adults.
In one scene Nani simply hands Lilo some money and leaves her in the middle of town on her own while she's at work. Clearly there was a reason they sent in The Man When Things Go Wrong before Stitch came into the picture.
Gainaxing : The female lifeguard who Nami attempts to get a job from has some restrained, yet noticeable, bouncing occur as soon as Stitch causes the panic on the beach.
Getting Crap Past the Radar : Subverted in that it's not in the movie, but the deleted scene did make it onto the DVD. A segment during the initial trial of Stitch looks briefly at damage he caused on the planet Piztov. Piztov. Say it fast.
Also, when Lilo tries to make amends after her dance class in the beginning of the movie, one of her "friends" tells her "If you have rabies, the dog-catcher's gonna have to c--"
Go to Your Room : When Nani tries this line, Lilo retorts "I'm already in my room!"
Insistent Terminology : Jumba does not appreciate being called an "idiot scientist".
I prefer to be called evil genius!
Inspector Javert : Captain Gantu, the closest thing to a villain in the story, who is initially only trying to recapture a dangerous, escaped experiment. A mixture of his callous tactics (he knows he's captured Lilo in the same container as Stitch and implies that he falesly believes that Stitch might eat her, yet he leaves her in there anyway) and the Galactic Federation's zero tolerance for failure causes him to be court martialed, after which he spends the animated series as an actual villain before being reinstated.
Logo Joke : The Disney castle is supposedly abducted by a flying saucer.
Loud Gulp : Pleakley gives a very visible gulp after dodging a door-piercing Improvised Weapon thrown by Jumba (who was aiming at Stitch but missed).
" Idiot Scientist ": Dr. Jumba Jookiba. Mind you, he prefers being called " Evil Genius ".
The Men in Black : Subverted with Cobra Bubbles, who works as social worker. Then double subverted when it's revealed that he once worked in the CIA and was directly involved in the case with the United Galactic Federation.
Miniature Senior Citizens : Mrs. Hasagawa, the vegetable lady. She's barely as tall as Stitch.
Ms. Fanservice : Nani spends almost all of the movie either in cutoffs or a bikini.
Which is also justified given that she lives in Hawaii.
Mood Whiplash : On the one hand, you have wacky slapstick alien antics. On the other, the ever-present threat of Lilo being taken away from her sister.
In particular, when Lilo's house gets wrecked by Jumba and Stitch's fight, it's played for laughs. When Nani and Cobra Bubbles arrive on the scene afterwords, it's not.
Moral Dissonance : Stitch is confirmed by all of the good guys to be Lilo's property, which (as a criminal, rather than an impounded non-person) means that they allow slavery by galactic rules and advocate it (at least for the purposes of Loophole Abuse ).
Although, given the Federation's reaction to Stitch, it's quite possible that they see him more as an animal than a person. Doesn't make it right, but it makes the reasoning a bit more understandable.
It's arguably possible that they have to (or are willing to) obey Earth rules in that case, and on Earth, Stitch was considered a pet, which humans claim ownership over. They do refer to Nani and Lilo as his "caretakers" rather than "masters".
Meaningful Name : Stitch; if something is ripped apart you fix it with a stitch.
Nigh Invulnerable : Stitch. "I suppose a photonic accelerator cannon at full power might stun him for a moment..."
Paper-Thin Disguise : Agent Pleakley. See Wholesome Crossdressing below.
Pardon My Klingon : The line "Meega nala kweesta" is an alien insult so vile that it makes mechanical species throw up in horror. Naturally, Stitch uses it once or twice throughout the movie and its spinoffs.
It's been established that the phrase actually translates into "I will destroy" or "I'm going to destroy" (contrast with "Meega naga kweesta/kreesta" - "I will not destroy"), which doesn't seem bad enough to provoke that kind of reaction. Granted, the phrase was used so much in a humorous context in promotional material that its meaning was likely an added afterthought for the spinoffs. Or they didn't think anyone would bother translating it in the movie.
During the fight with Jumba Stitch says something in the alien language and Jumba tells him to leave his mother out of it.
Parental Abandonment : As usual, for a Disney movie; they died in a car crash before the story began.
Pet the Dog : When the Grand Councilwoman announces Stitch's sentence to permanent exile, she says it shall be "a sentence that shall henceforth be served on Earth." Bonus points for Stitch being mistaken for a dog early in the film.
A moment which Cobra Bubbles and Pleakley join in on - Pleakley is the first to ask if Stitch really couldn't just be left with them after cursing Stitch and the planet for causing him so many problems, while Cobra Bubbles is the first to realize the ownership loophole and helps Nani and Lilo get back on their feet during the credits.
Scary Black Man : Cobra Bubbles, who is voiced by none other than Ving Rhames .
Played with. At first, he looks very imposing and acts rather uncaring. However later on, he shows himself to be a lot more than that. He does indeed want Lilo to be safe, but he doesn't want to split Lilo and Nani up because they're all they have in the world, mentioning he'll take Lilo away only because he has to. The end credits show him hanging out with them, watching movies and having Thanksgiving dinner.
Sesquipedalian Loquaciousness : It's said that Stitch can't survive in water since "his molecular density is too great". This would mean simply that he has a higher density than water--I.E, even if he were, for example, to hold his breath, he would not be able to displace enough water to increase his buoyancy enough and he'd still be too dense to swim. In laymen's terms: he sinks like a rock and can't swim.
Shout-Out : When Stitch rips up a drawing of Lilo's, she exclaims, "No! That's from my blue period!"
Many of the background aliens have designs based on Winnie the Pooh characters. The alien who says "He's loose on deck C" appears to be modelled after Roo, The alien who calculates where Stitch will land is clearly modelled after Piglet
Mulan Wok. Also, there is a Mulan poster hanging on Nani's wall.
In Lilo's room, on the shelf on her easel there's a small Dumbo doll.
During the end credits, the photo around the dinner table is staged like "Freedom From Want"
Social Services Does Not Exist : Averted in the most traumatizing way - the contrast of wacky alien hi-jinks with the reality of a teenage orphan trying and failing to support her baby sister is a main plot point.
Source Music : The opening chant, "He Mele No Lilo", is also the song being performed by Lilo's hula class, for which she is late.
Standard Snippet : Given that this movie is set in Hawaii, Aloha O'e naturally makes an appearance. However, it's not the silly instrumental steel guitar version that shows up most times this song is used as a Standard Snippet --the lyrics (about saying goodbye to someone) show up, too, in the most utterly heartbreaking fashion.
Superior Species : The aliens compared to "primitive humanoid life forms".
Kinda justified though, from the point of view of a galactic-spanning alien empire, Humans are primitive.
Interquel
Retcon : The fact that Jumba was apprehended immediately after Stitch's creation retcons the events of some of the Comic Zone prequels , the events of the Experiment 626 video game and Experiment 621 out of existance, though 621 theoretically could've been captured during the series.
The Other Darrin : Daveigh Chase was busy voicing Lilo for the series , so her friend Dakota Fanning took over the role for this film.
The Power of Love : The subject of Lilo's hula. Also what saves Stitch at the end.
Wasted Song : When Stitch "dies", a very sad reprise of 'Always' sung by Hayley Westenra plays, but it was never released on the CD.
The short film The Origin of Stitch provides examples of:[ edit | hide ]
Series Continuity Error : Almost all of the experiments are displayed with incorrect numbers. Particularly obvious at the beginning, which shows #617 Plasmoid as #001 (Shrink), #609 Heat as #002 (Doubledip), and #601 Kixx as #003 (Howcome).
The sequel Stitch! The Movie provides examples of:[ edit | hide ]
Art Shift : The movie has a simpler and thicker lined style than the original film.
Big Bad : Dr. Jacques Von Hamsterviel, also revealed to be the Bigger Bad behind Jumba and his experiments in the first place.
The final movie Leroy and Stitch provides examples of:[ edit | hide ]
Ambadassador : Lilo to the Galactic Federation.
Art Shift : The movie has a simpler and thicker lined style than the original film.
