Book of Psalms - Read the Bible Online
Book of Psalms
Videos
Summary of the Book of Psalms
This summary of the book of Psalms provides information about the title, author(s), date of writing, chronology, theme,  theology, outline, a brief overview, and the chapters of the Book of Psalms.
Title
The titles "Psalms" and "Psalter" come from the Septuagint (the pre-Christian   Greek translation of the OT), where they originally referred to stringed instruments   (such as harp, lyre and lute), then to songs sung with their accompaniment.   The traditional Hebrew title is tehillim (meaning "praises"; see note   on Ps 145 title), even though many of the psalms are tephillot (meaning   "prayers"). In fact, one of the first collections included in the book was   titled "the prayers of David son of Jesse" ( 72:20 ).
Collection, Arrangement and Date
The Psalter is a collection of collections and represents the final stage   in a process that spanned centuries. It was put into its final form by postexilic   temple personnel, who completed it probably in the third century b.c. As such,   it has often been called the prayer book of the "second" (Zerubbabel's and   Herod's) temple and was used in the synagogues as well. But it is more than   a treasury of prayers and hymns for liturgical and private use on chosen occasions.   Both the scope of its subject matter and the arrangement of the whole collection   strongly suggest that this collection was viewed by its final editors as a   book of instruction in the faith and in full-orbed godliness -- thus a guide for   the life of faith in accordance with the Law, the Prophets and the canonical   wisdom literature. By the first century a.d. it was referred to as the "Book of Psalms" ( Lk 20:42 ; Ac 1:20 ). At that time Psalms   appears also to have been used as a title for the entire section of the Hebrew   OT canon more commonly known as the "Writings" (see Lk 24:44 and note).
Many collections preceded this final compilation of the Psalms. In fact,   the formation of psalters probably goes back to the early days of the first   (Solomon's) temple (or even to the time of David), when the temple liturgy   began to take shape. Reference has already been made to "the prayers of David."   Additional collections expressly referred to in the present Psalter titles   are: (1) the songs and/or psalms "of the Sons of Korah" ( Ps 42-49 ; 84-85 ; 87-88 ),   (2) the psalms and/or songs "of Asaph" ( Ps 50 ; 73-83 ) and (3) the songs "of   ascents" ( Ps 120-134 ).
Other evidence points to further compilations. Ps 1-41 (Book I) make frequent   use of the divine name Yahweh ("the Lord"), while Ps 42-72 (Book II) make frequent   use of Elohim ("God"). The reason for the Elohim collection in distinction   from the Yahweh collection remains a matter of speculation. Moreover, Ps 93-100 appear to be a traditional collection (see "The Lord reigns" in 93:1 ; 96:10 ; 97:1 ; 99:1 ). Other apparent groupings include Ps 111-118 (a series of Hallelujah psalms; see introduction to Ps 113 ), Ps 138-145 (all of which include "of David" in their titles) and Ps 146-150 (with their frequent "Praise the Lord"; see NIV text note on 111:1 ). Whether the "Great Hallel" ( Ps 120-136 ) was already a recognized unit is not known.
In its final edition, the Psalter contained 150 psalms. On this the Septuagint   (the pre-Christian Greek translation of the OT) and Hebrew texts agree, though   they arrive at this number differently. The Septuagint has an extra psalm at   the end (but not numbered separately as Ps 151 ); it also unites Ps 9-10 (see NIV text note on Ps 9 ) and Ps 114-115 and divides Ps 116 and Ps 147 each into   two psalms. Strangely, both the Septuagint and Hebrew texts number Ps 42-43 as two psalms whereas they were evidently originally one (see NIV text note on Ps 42 ).
In its final form the Psalter was divided into five Books ( Ps 1-41 ; 42-72 ; 73-89 ; 90-106 ; 107-150 ), each of which was provided with a concluding doxology   (see 41:13 ; 72:18-19 ; 89:52 ; 106:48 ; 150 ). The first two of these Books, as   already noted, were probably preexilic. The division of the remaining psalms   into three Books, thus attaining the number five, was possibly in imitation   of the five books of Moses (otherwise known simply as the Law). At least one   of these divisions (between Ps 106-107 ) seems arbitrary (see introduction to Ps 107 ). In spite of this five-book division, the Psalter was clearly thought   of as a whole, with an introduction ( Ps 1-2 ) and a conclusion ( Ps 146-150 ).   Notes throughout the Psalms give additional indications of conscious arrangement   (see also chart, p. 1048-1051).
Authorship and Titles (or Superscriptions)
Of the 150 psalms, only 34 lack superscriptions of any kind (only 17 in the   Septuagint, the pre-Christian Greek translation of the OT). These so-called   "orphan" psalms are found mainly in Books III-V, where they tend to occur in   clusters: Ps 91 ; 93-97 ; 99 ; 104-107 ; 111-119 ; 135-137 ; 146-150 . (In Books I-II,   only Ps 1-2 ; 10 ; 33 ; 43 ; 71 lack titles, and Ps 10 and 43 are actually continuations of the preceding psalms.)
The contents of the superscriptions vary but fall into a few broad categories:   (1) author, (2) name of collection, (3) type of psalm, (4) musical notations,   (5) liturgical notations and (6) brief indications of occasion for composition.   For details see notes on the titles of the various psalms.
Students of the Psalms are not agreed on the antiquity and reliability of   these superscriptions. That many of them are at least preexilic appears evident   from the fact that the Septuagint translators were sometimes unclear as to   their meaning. Furthermore, the practice of attaching titles, including the   name of the author, is ancient. On the other hand, comparison between the Septuagint   and the Hebrew texts shows that the content of some titles was still subject   to change well into the postexilic period. Most discussion centers on categories   1 and 6 above.
As for the superscriptions regarding occasion of composition, many of these   brief notations of events read as if they had been taken from 1,2 Samuel. Moreover,   they are sometimes not easily correlated with the content of the psalms they   head. The suspicion therefore arises that they are later attempts to fit the   psalms into the real-life events of history. But then why the limited number   of such notations, and why the apparent mismatches? The arguments cut both   ways.
Regarding authorship, opinions are even more divided. The notations themselves   are ambiguous since the Hebrew phraseology used, meaning in general "belonging   to," can also be taken in the sense of "concerning" or "for the use of" or   "dedicated to." The name may refer to the title of a collection of psalms that   had been gathered under a certain name (as "Of Asaph" or "Of the Sons of Korah").   To complicate matters, there is evidence within the Psalter that at least some   of the psalms were subjected to editorial revision in the course of their transmission.   As for Davidic authorship, there can be little doubt that the Psalter contains   psalms composed by that noted singer and musician and that there was at one   time a "Davidic" psalter. This, however, may have also included psalms written   concerning David, or concerning one of the later Davidic kings, or even psalms   written in the manner of those he authored. It is also true that the tradition   as to which psalms are "Davidic" remains somewhat indefinite, and some "Davidic"   psalms seem clearly to reflect later situations (see, e.g., Ps 30 title -- but   see also note there; and see introduction to Ps 69 and note on Ps 122 title).   Moreover, "David" is sometimes used elsewhere as a collective for the kings   of his dynasty, and this could also be true in the psalm titles.
The word Selah is found in 39 psalms, all but two of which ( Ps 140 ; 143 ,   both "Davidic") are in Books I-III. It is also found in Hab 3 , a psalm-like   poem. Suggestions as to its meaning abound, but honesty must confess ignorance.   Most likely, it is a liturgical notation. The common suggestions that it calls   for a brief musical interlude or for a brief liturgical response by the congregation   are plausible but unproven (the former may be supported by the Septuagint rendering).   In some instances its present placement in the Hebrew text is highly questionable.
Psalm Types
Hebrew superscriptions to the Psalms acquaint us with an ancient system of   classification: (1) mizmor ("psalm"); (2) shiggaion (see   note on Ps 7 title); (3) miktam (see note on Ps 16 title); (4) shir ("song"); (5) masvkil (see note on Ps 32 title); (6) tephillah ("prayer"); (7) tehillah ("praise"); (8) lehazkir ("for being remembered" -- i.e., before God, a petition); (9) letodah ("for praising" or "for giving   thanks"); (10) lelammed ("for teaching"); and (11) shir yedidot ("song   of loves" -- i.e., a wedding song). The meaning of many of these terms, however,   is uncertain. In addition, some titles contain two of these (especially mizmor and shir),   indicating that the types are diversely based and overlapping.
Analysis of content has given rise to a different classification that has   proven useful for study of the Psalms. The main types that can be identified   are: (1) prayers of the individual (e.g., Ps 3-7 ); (2) praise from the individual   for God's saving help (e.g., Ps 30 ; 34 ); (3) prayers of the community (e.g., Ps 12 ; 44 ; 79 ); (4) praise from the community for God's saving help (e.g., Ps 66 ; 75 ); (5) confessions of confidence in the Lord (e.g., Ps 11 ; 16 ; 52 ); (6) hymns in praise of God's majesty and virtues (e.g., Ps 8 ; 19 ; 29 ; 65 ); (7) hymns celebrating God's universal reign ( Ps 47 ; 93-99 ); (8) songs of Zion, the city of God ( Ps 46 ; 48 ; 76 ; 84 ; 122 ; 126 ; 129 ; 137 ); (9) royal psalms -- by, for or concerning the king, the Lord's anointed (e.g., Ps 2 ; 18 ; 20 ; 45 ; 72 ; 89 ; 110 ); (10) pilgrimage songs ( Ps 120-134 ); (11) liturgical songs (e.g., Ps 15 ; 24 ; 68 ); (12) didactic (instructional) songs (e.g., Ps 1 ; 34 ; 37 ; 73 ; 112 ; 119 ; 128 ; 133 ).
This classification also involves some overlapping. For example, "prayers   of the individual" may include prayers of the king (in his special capacity   as king) or even prayers of the community speaking in the collective first   person singular. Nevertheless, it is helpful to study a psalm in conjunction   with others of the same type. Attempts to fix specific liturgical settings   for each type have not been very convincing. For those psalms about which something   can be said in this regard see introductions to the individual psalms.
Of all these psalm types, the prayers (both of the individual and of the   community) are the most complex. Several speech functions are combined to form   these appeals to God: (1) address to God: "O Lord," "my God," "my deliverer";   (2) initial appeal: "Arise," "Answer me," "Help," "Save me"; (3) description   of distress: "Many are rising against me," "The wicked attack," "I am in distress";   (4) complaint against God: "Why have you forsaken me?" "How long will you hide   your face from me?"; (5) petition: "Be not far from me," "Vindicate me"; (6)   motivation for God to hear: "for I take refuge in you," "for your name's sake";   (7) accusation against the adversary: "There is no truth in their mouths,"   "Ruthless men seek my life" ("the wicked" are often quoted); (8) call for judicial   redress: "Let them be put to shame," "Call him to account for his wickedness";   (9) claims of innocence: "I have walked in my integrity," "They hate me without   cause"; (10) confessions of sin: "I have sinned against you," "I confess my   iniquity"; (11) professions of trust: "You are a shield about me," "You will   answer me"; (12) vows to praise for deliverance: "I will sing your might,"   "My lips will praise you"; (13) calls to praise: "Magnify the Lord with me,"     "Sing praise to the Lord"; (14) motivations for praise: "for you have delivered   me," "for the Lord hears the needy."
Though not all these appear in every prayer, they all belong to the conventions   of prayer in the Psalter, with petition itself being but one (usually brief)   element among the rest. On the whole they reflect the then-current conventions   of a court trial, the psalmists presenting their cases before the heavenly   King/Judge. When beset by wicked adversaries, the petitioners appeal to God   for a hearing, describe their situation, plead their innocence ("righteousness"),   lodge their accusations against their adversaries, and appeal for deliverance   and judicial redress. When suffering at the hands of God (when God is their   adversary), they confess their guilt and plead for mercy. Attention to these   various speech functions and their role in the psalmists' judicial appeals   to the heavenly Judge will significantly aid the reader's understanding of   these psalms.
It should be noted that reference to "penitential" and "imprecatory" psalms   as distinct psalm "types" has no basis in the Psalter collection itself. The   former ("penitential") refers to an early Christian selection of seven psalms   ( 6 ; 32 ; 38 ; 51 ; 102 ; 130 ; 143 ) for liturgical expressions of penitence; the   latter ("imprecatory") is based on a misconstrual of one of the speech functions   found in the prayers. What are actually appeals to the heavenly Judge for judicial   redress (function 8 noted above) are taken to be curses ("imprecation" means   "curse") pronounced by the psalmists on their adversaries. See note on 5:10 .
Literary Features
The Psalter is from first to last poetry, even though it contains many prayers   and not all OT prayers were poetic (see 1Ki 8:23-53 ; Ezr 9:6-15 ; Ne 9:5-37 ; Da 9:4-19 ) -- nor, for that matter, was all praise poetic (see 1Ki 8:15-21 ). The Psalms are impassioned, vivid and concrete; they are rich in images, in simile   and metaphor. Assonance, alliteration and wordplays abound in the Hebrew text.   Effective use of repetition and the piling up of synonyms and complements to   fill out the picture are characteristic. Key words frequently highlight major   themes in prayer or song. Enclosure (repetition of a significant word or phrase   at the end that occurs at the beginning) frequently wraps up a composition   or a unit within it. The notes on the structure of the individual psalms often   call attention to literary frames within which the psalm has been set.
Hebrew poetry lacks rhyme and regular meter. Its most distinctive and pervasive   feature is parallelism. Most poetic lines are composed of two (sometimes three)   balanced segments (the balance is often loose, with the second segment commonly   somewhat shorter than the first). The second segment either echoes (synonymous   parallelism), contrasts (antithetic parallelism) or syntactically completes   (synthetic parallelism) the first. These three types are generalizations and   are not wholly adequate to describe the rich variety that the creativity of   the poets has achieved within the basic two-segment line structure. When the   second or third segment of a poetic line repeats, echoes or overlaps the content   of the preceding segment, it usually intensifies or more sharply focuses the   thought or its expression. They can serve, however, as rough distinctions that   will assist the reader. In the NIV the second and third segments of a line   are slightly indented relative to the first.
Determining where the Hebrew poetic lines or line segments begin or end (scanning)   is sometimes an uncertain matter. Even the Septuagint (the pre-Christian Greek   translation of the OT) at times scans the lines differently from the way the   Hebrew texts now available to us do. It is therefore not surprising that modern   translations occasionally differ.
A related problem is the extremely concise, often elliptical writing style   of the Hebrew poets. The syntactical connection of words must at times be inferred   simply from context. Where more than one possibility presents itself, translators   are confronted with ambiguity. They are not always sure with which line segment   a border word or phrase is to be read.
The stanza structure of Hebrew poetry is also a matter of dispute. Occasionally,   recurring refrains mark off stanzas, as in Ps 42-43 ; 57 . In Ps 110 two balanced stanzas are divided by their introductory oracles (see also introduction to Ps 132 ), while Ps 119 devotes eight lines to each letter of the Hebrew alphabet. For the most part, however, no such obvious indicators are present. The NIV   has used spaces to mark off poetic paragraphs (called "stanzas" in the notes).   Usually this could be done with some confidence, and the reader is advised   to be guided by them. But there are a few places where these divisions are   questionable -- and are challenged in the notes.
Close study of the Psalms discloses that the authors often composed with   an overall design in mind. This is true of the alphabetic acrostics, in which   the poet devoted to each letter of the Hebrew alphabet one line segment (as   in Ps 111-112 ), or a single line (as in Ps 25 ; 34 ; 145 ), or two lines (as in Ps 37 ), or eight lines (as in Ps 119 ). In addition Ps 33 ; 38 ; 103 each have 22 lines, no doubt because of the number of letters in the Hebrew alphabet (see Introduction to Lamentations: Literary Features). The oft-voiced notion   that this device was used as a memory aid seems culturally prejudiced and quite   unwarranted. Actually people of that time were able to memorize far more readily   than most people today. It is much more likely that the alphabet -- which was   relatively recently invented as a simple system of symbols capable of representing   in writing the rich and complex patterns of human speech and therefore of inscribing   all that can be put into words (one of the greatest intellectual achievements   of all time) -- commended itself as a framework on which to hang significant phrases.
Other forms were also used. Ps 44 is a prayer fashioned after the design   of a ziggurat (a Babylonian stepped pyramid; see note on Ge 11:4 ). A sense   of symmetry is pervasive. There are psalms that devote the same number of lines   to each stanza (as Ps 12 ; 41 ), or do so with variation only in the introductory   or concluding stanza (as Ps 38 ; 83 ; 94 ). Others match the opening and closing   stanzas and balance those between (as Ps 33 ; 86 ). A particularly interesting   device is to place a key thematic line at the very center, sometimes constructing   the whole or part of the poem around that center (see note on 6:6 ). Still other   design features are pointed out in the notes. The authors of the psalms crafted   their compositions very carefully. They were heirs of an ancient art (in many   details showing that they had inherited a poetic tradition that goes back hundreds   of years), and they developed it to a state of high sophistication. Their works   are best appreciated when carefully studied and pondered.
Theology: Introduction
The Psalter is for the most part a book of prayer and praise. In it faith   speaks to God in prayer and of God in praise. But there are also psalms that   are explicitly didactic (instructional) in form and purpose (teaching the way   of godliness). As noted above (Collection, Arrangement and Date), the manner   in which the whole collection has been arranged suggests that one of its main   purposes was instruction in the life of faith, a faith formed and nurtured   by the Law, the Prophets and the canonical wisdom literature. Accordingly,   the Psalter is theologically rich. Its theology is, however, not abstract or   systematic but doxological, confessional and practical. So a summation of that   "theology" impoverishes it by translating it into an objective mode.
Furthermore, any summation faces a still greater problem. The Psalter is   a large collection of independent pieces of many kinds, serving different purposes   and composed over the course of many centuries. Not only must a brief summary   of its "theology" be selective and incomplete; it will also of necessity be   somewhat artificial. It will suggest that each psalm reflects or at least presupposes   the "theology" outlined, that there is no "theological" tension or progression   within the Psalter. Manifestly this is not so.
Still, the final editors of the Psalter were obviously not eclectic in their   selection. They knew that many voices from many times spoke here, but none   that in their judgment was incompatible with the Law and the Prophets. No doubt   they also assumed that each psalm was to be understood in the light of the   collection as a whole. That assumption we may share. Hence something, after   all, can be said concerning seven major theological themes that, while admittedly   a bit artificial, need not seriously distort and can be helpful to the student   of the Psalms.
Theology: Major Themes
At the core of the theology of the Psalter is the conviction that the     gravitational center of life (of right human understanding, trust, hope,     service, morality, adoration), but also of history and of the whole creation     (heaven and earth), is God (Yahweh, "the Lord"; see Dt 6:4 and     note). He is the Great King over all, the One to whom all things     are subject. He created all things and preserves them; they are the robe     of glory with which he has clothed himself. Because he ordered them, they     have a well-defined and "true" identity (no chaos there). Because he maintains     them, they are sustained and kept secure from disruption, confusion or     annihilation. Because he alone is the sovereign God, they are governed     by one hand and held in the service of one divine purpose. Under God creation     is a cosmos -- an orderly and systematic whole. What we distinguish as "nature"     and history had for the psalmists one Lord, under whose rule all things     worked together. Through the creation the Great King's majestic glory is     displayed. He is good (wise, righteous, faithful, amazingly benevolent     and merciful -- evoking trust), and he is great (his knowledge, thoughts and     works are beyond human comprehension -- evoking reverent awe). By his good     and lordly rule he is shown to be the Holy One.
As the Great King by right of creation and enduring absolute sovereignty, he     ultimately will not tolerate any worldly power that opposes or denies     or ignores him. He will come to rule the nations so that all will     be compelled to acknowledge him. This expectation is no doubt the root     and broadest scope of the psalmists' long view of the future. Because     the Lord is the Great King beyond all challenge, his righteous and peaceable kingdom will come, overwhelming all opposition and purging the creation of all rebellion against his rule -- such will be the ultimate outcome of history.
As the Great King on whom all creatures depend, he opposes the "proud,"     those who rely on their own resources (and/or the gods they have contrived)     to work out their own destiny. These are the ones who ruthlessly     wield whatever power they possess to attain worldly wealth, status and     security; who are a law to themselves and exploit others as they will.     In the Psalter, this kind of "pride" is the root of all evil. Those who     embrace it, though they may seem to prosper, will be brought down to     death, their final end. The "humble," the "poor and needy," those who     acknowledge their dependence on the Lord in all things -- these are the     ones in whom God delights. Hence the "fear of the Lord" -- i.e., humble     trust in and obedience to the Lord -- is the "beginning" of all wisdom ( 111:10 ).     Ultimately, those who embrace it will inherit the earth. Not even death     can hinder their seeing the face of God.
The psalmists' hope for the future -- the future of God and his kingdom and     the future of the godly -- was firm, though somewhat generalized. None of     the psalmists gives expression to a two-age vision of the future (the present     evil age giving way to a new age of righteousness and peace on the other     side of a great eschatological divide). Such a view began to appear in     the intertestamental literature -- a view that had been foreshadowed by Daniel     (see especially Da 12:2-3 ) and by Isaiah (see Isa 65:17-25 ; 66:22-24 ) -- and it later received full expression in the teaching of Jesus and the apostles. But     this revelation was only a fuller development consistent with the hopes     the psalmists lived by.
Because God is the Great King, he is the ultimate Executor of justice     among humans (to avenge oneself is an act of the "proud"). God is     the court of appeal when persons are threatened or wronged -- especially     when no earthly court that he has established has jurisdiction (as in     the case of international conflicts) or is able to judge (as when one     is wronged by public slander) or is willing to act (out of fear or corruption). He       is the mighty and faithful Defender of the defenseless and the wronged. He     knows every deed and the secrets of every heart. There is no escaping     his scrutiny. No false testimony will mislead him in judgment. And he     hears the pleas brought to him. As the good and faithful Judge, he delivers     those who are oppressed or wrongfully attacked and redresses the wrongs     committed against them (see note on 5:10 ). This is the unwavering conviction     that accounts for the psalmists' impatient complaints when they boldly,     yet as "poor and needy," cry to him, "Why, O Lord, (have you not yet     delivered me)?" "How long, O Lord (before you act)?"
As the Great King over all the earth, the Lord has chosen Israel     to be his servant people, his "inheritance" among the nations. He     has delivered them by mighty acts out of the hands of the world powers,     he has given them a land of their own (territory that he took from other     nations to be his own "inheritance" in the earth), and he has united       them with himself in covenant as the initial embodiment of his redeemed       kingdom. Thus both their destiny and his honor came to be bound     up with this relationship. To them he also gave his word of revelation,     which testified of him, made specific his promises and proclaimed his     will. By God's covenant, Israel was to live among the nations, loyal     only to her heavenly King. She was to trust solely in his protection,     hope in his promises, live in accordance with his will and worship him     exclusively. She was to sing his praises to the whole world -- which in     a special sense revealed Israel's anticipatory role in the evangelization     of the nations.
As the Great King, Israel's covenant Lord, God chose David to be     his royal representative on earth. In this capacity, David was the     Lord's "servant" -- i.e., a member of the Great King's administration. The     Lord himself anointed him and adopted him as his royal "son" to rule     in his name. Through him God made his people secure in the promised land     and subdued all the powers that threatened them. What is more, he       covenanted to preserve the Davidic dynasty. Henceforth the kingdom     of God on earth, while not dependent on the house of David, was linked     to it by God's decision and commitment. In its continuity and strength     lay Israel's security and hope as she faced a hostile world. And since     the Davidic kings were God's royal representatives in the earth, in concept     seated at God's right hand ( 110:1 ), the scope of their rule was potentially     worldwide (see Ps 2 ).
The Lord's anointed, however, was more than a warrior king. He was to be     endowed by God to govern his people with godlike righteousness: to deliver     the oppressed, defend the defenseless, suppress the wicked, and thus bless     the nation with internal peace and prosperity. He was also an intercessor     with God in behalf of the nation, the builder and maintainer of the temple     (as God's earthly palace and the nation's house of prayer) and the foremost     voice calling the nation to worship the Lord. It is perhaps with a view     to these last duties that he is declared to be not only king, but also     "priest" (see Ps 110 and notes).
As the Great King, Israel's covenant Lord, God (who had chosen     David and his dynasty to be his royal representatives) also chose Jerusalem       (the City of David) as his own royal city, the earthly seat of his throne.       Thus Jerusalem (Zion) became the earthly capital (and symbol) of the kingdom       of God. There in his palace (the temple) he sat enthroned among his people. There     his people could meet with him to bring their prayers and praise, and to     see his power and glory. From there he brought salvation, dispensed blessings     and judged the nations. And with him as the city's great Defender, Jerusalem     was the secure citadel of the kingdom of God, the hope and joy of God's     people.
God's goodwill and faithfulness toward his people were most strikingly     symbolized by his pledged presence among them at his temple in Jerusalem,     the "city of the Great King" ( 48:2 ). But no manifestation of his benevolence     was greater than his readiness to forgive the sins of those who humbly     confessed them and whose hearts showed him that their repentance was genuine     and that their professions of loyalty to him had integrity. As they anguished     over their own sinfulness, the psalmists remembered the ancient testimony     of their covenant Lord: I am Yahweh ("the Lord"), "the compassionate and     gracious God, slow to anger, abounding in love and faithfulness, maintaining     love to thousands, and forgiving wickedness, rebellion and sin" ( Ex 34:6-7 ).     Only so did they dare to submit to him as his people, to "fear" him (see 130:3-4 ).
Theology: Summary, Messianic Import and Conclusion
Unquestionably the supreme kingship of Yahweh (in which he displays his transcendent   greatness and goodness) is the most basic metaphor and most pervasive theological   concept in the Psalter -- as in the OT generally. It provides the fundamental   perspective in which people are to view themselves, the whole creation, events   in "nature" and history, and the future. All creation is Yahweh's one kingdom.   To be a creature in the world is to be a part of his kingdom and under his   rule. To be a human being in the world is to be dependent on and responsible   to him. To proudly deny that fact is the root of all wickedness -- the wickedness   that now pervades the world.
God's election of Israel and subsequently of David and Zion, together with   the giving of his word, represent the renewed inbreaking of God's righteous   kingdom into this world of rebellion and evil. It initiates the great divide   between the righteous nation and the wicked nations, and on a deeper level   between the righteous and the wicked, a more significant distinction that cuts   even through Israel. In the end this divine enterprise will triumph. Human   pride will be humbled, and wrongs will be redressed. The humble will be given   the whole earth to possess, and the righteous and peaceable kingdom of God   will come to full realization. These theological themes, of course, have profound   religious and moral implications. Of these, too, the psalmists spoke.
One question that ought yet to be addressed is: Do the Psalms speak of the   Christ? Yes, in a variety of ways -- but not as the prophets do. The Psalter was   never numbered among the "prophetic" books. On the other hand, when the Psalter   was being given its final form, what the psalms said about the Lord and his   ways with his people, about the Lord and his ways with the nations, about the   Lord and his ways with the righteous and the wicked, and what the psalmists   said about the Lord's anointed, his temple and his holy city -- all this was understood   in light of the prophetic literature (both Former and Latter Prophets). Relative   to these matters, the Psalter and the Prophets were mutually reinforcing and   interpretive.
When the Psalms speak of the king on David's throne, they speak of the king   who is being crowned (as in Ps 2 ; 72 ; 110 -- though some think 110 is an exception)   or is reigning (as in Ps 45 ) at the time. They proclaim his status as the Lord's   anointed and declare what the Lord will accomplish through him and his dynasty.   Thus they also speak of the sons of David to come -- and in the exile and the   postexilic era, when there was no reigning king, they spoke to Israel only   of the great Son of David whom the prophets had announced as the one in whom   God's covenant with David would yet be fulfilled. So the NT quotes these psalms   as testimonies to Christ, which in their unique way they are. In him they are   truly fulfilled.
When in the Psalms righteous sufferers -- who are "righteous" because they are   innocent, not having provoked or wronged their adversaries, and because they   are among the "humble" who trust in the Lord -- cry out to God in their distress   (as in Ps 22 ; 69 ), they give voice to the sufferings of God's servants in a   hostile and evil world.
These cries became the prayers of God's oppressed "saints," and as such they   were taken up into Israel's book of prayers. When Christ came in the flesh,   he identified himself with God's "humble" people in the world. He became for   them God's righteous servant par excellence, and he shared their sufferings   at the hands of the wicked. Thus these prayers became his prayers also -- uniquely   his prayers. In him the suffering and deliverance of which these prayers speak   are fulfilled (though they continue to be the prayers also of those who take   up their cross and follow him).
Similarly, in speaking of God's covenant people, of the city of God, and   of the temple in which God dwells, the Psalms ultimately speak of Christ's   church. The Psalter is not only the prayer book of the second temple; it is   also the enduring prayer book of the people of God. Now, however, it must be   used in the light of the new era of redemption that dawned with the first coming   of the Messiah and that will be consummated at his second coming.
From the NIV Study Bible, Introductions to the Books of the Bible, Psalms
Copyright 2002 © Zondervan. All rights reserved. Used with permission.
