Christiaan Barnard Biography - Childhood, Life Achievements & Timeline
Physicians
Christiaan Barnard Biography
Christiaan Barnard is one name that we associate with the first ever heart transplant. Read more to find out about his childhood, life and timeline.
Quick Facts
University of Cape Town
University of Minnesota
It was on the historical third day of December in the year 1967 when Christiaan Barnard added a new glorious chapter to the pages of medical history with his first human-to-human heart transplant. It was his deep fascination and his sincere personal drive that led him to accomplish this groundbreaking surgery. Born and brought up in South Africa, Barnard hailed from a Dutch family and had an exceptional academic career to boast of. His interests in medicine were dedicated to tubercular meningitis in which he wrote a doctoral thesis in the year 1953. After he was transferred to the historic operation site, Groote Schuur Hospital, he developed his interests in surgery. Barnard was an avant-garde who is credited for conducting and successfully accomplishing human heart transplant. His outspoken talents have made him one among the most significant and influential people in medicine. Barnard raised the bar by conducting a daring experiment at a time when such ideas were unheard of and deemed as dangerous and this achievement brought to the fore the true magnitude of his talent and passion. In his journey, he continued to astound people with major and remarkable achievements. Scroll further to know more!
Early Life And Childhood
Christiaan Barnard was born in Beaufort West, South Africa to Adam Barnard, a Dutch descendant and a priest in the Dutch Reformed Church. Barnard lost one of his brothers, Abraham due to cardiac illness when he was five years old. Barnard finished schooling at Beaufort West High School in 1940 and pursued his medical education from the University of Cape Town, Medical School where he attained his MB ChB in 1945. He completed his internship and residency in Cape Town at the Groote Schuur Hospital and was employed as a general practitioner in Ceres, which was a rural town in the Province of the Cape of Good Hope. Later, in 1951, he returned to Cape Town and served at the City Hospital in the post of Senior Resident Medical Officer and also at the Groote Schuur Hospital as a registrar in the Department of Medicine. He received a Master of Medicine in 1953 from the University of Cape Town and the same year acquired a doctorate in medicine (MD) from the same university. His subject of thesis was entitled, ‘The treatment of tuberculous meningitis’. Christiaan received a two-year scholarship in 1956 to pursue his postgraduate training in cardiothoracic surgery in United States at the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. During this time, Barnard met Norman Shumway who devoted her efforts in pioneering research of the first human heart transplant. The years from 1956-1958 in U.S. gifted him with fascinating experiences in his life as he received a Master of Science in Surgery for his dissertation — ‘The aetiology of congenital intestinal atresia’. Being awarded the Doctor of Philosophy degree the same year for his thesis on ‘The aetiology of congenital intestinal atresia’ doubled his joy.  
 
Return To South Africa
As soon as Christiaan Barnard returned to South Africa, he was offered the post of cardiothoracic surgeon in 1958 at the Groote Schuur Hospital. This marked the establishment of the hospital’s first heart unit. At the University of Cape Town, he was promoted to the post of full time lecturer and as Director of Surgical Research. After three years, he was made the head of the Division of the Cardiothoracic Surgery of the University of Cape Town at the teaching hospitals. Later, in 1962, he became the Associate Professor at the same university in the Department of Surgery. Here, Barnard worked along with his younger brother, Marius, a student of medicine who was referred to be his right–hand man at the Cardiac Surgery department. Over the course of time, Barnard gathered fame as a brilliant surgeon with remarkable contributions mainly in the treatment of Tetralogy of Fallot and Ebstein’s anomaly, cardiac diseases. In 1972, he was promoted to the post of Professor of Surgical Science at the University of Cape Town in the Department of Surgery.
 
As A Surgeon
In 1960, he went to the Soviet Union with the aid of a bursary that he had acquired from the Oppenheimer Memorial Trust. He got a chance to study about the techniques of transplant of the heads and hearts on dogs. After returning to South Africa, Barnard and his brother, Marius, who was also a surgeon conducted various heart transplants in dogs. He performed this with the help of a method called Shumway technique. Towards the end of 1967, Barnard gathered confidence to perform the same on humans and was waiting for an appropriate patient and donor.
 
Film Star Surgeon
After Barnard’s first successful kidney transplant in the United States in 1953, he was all set to accomplish the same in South Africa in October 1967. During this time, several pioneering works were done in this regard — Norman Shumway’s surgical team preparing for a human heart transplant being one among them. At the same time, Barnard encountered a patient willing for a heart transplant, but the non–availability of the right donor was the problem. Thus, an innovative yet surprising miracle took place on 3 December 1967 while Barnard operated a fifty three year Louis Washkansky, an old grocer and replaced his heart with a twenty five year old Denise Darvall. Darvall was a young woman who suffered from brain damage in an accident on 2 December 1967 in Cape Town. Barnard secured permission from her father and conducted the successful transplant.
 
The Success Story
The initial public response that he received with regard to this operation was negative and fraught with controversies and ethical oppositions. The public demanded an answer for the death of the donor since patients could live by artificial means for an unlimited period of time. However, after his successful heart transplant, his eminence was catapulted to great heights and he came to be highly regarded by his patients.  Washkansky survived with the new heart for eighteen days after which he developed pneumonia because of the immunosuppressive drugs he was taking.  Hence, he was able to state that in order to suppress body’s basic mechanism of rejection of foreign tissue; he should be given powerful antirejection medications. They are known as ‘immune suppressants’ and reduce body’s resistance towards foreign tissue and thereby suppress the overall immune response as well. After the success story of Barnard with his operations, several surgeons took up the same task, but yielded poor results. The percentage of patients who survived was considerably low. Philip Blaiberg, who was Barnard’s second patient survived for 593 days (19 months) and Dirk van Zyl was the patient who lived the longest, surviving for over 23 years with his new heart. Barnard accomplished ten orthotopic transplants and was famous for his heterotropic (double heart) heart transplant in which the patient’s heart is not removed and a new heart is positioned effectively. He also gathered the fame of being the first to conduct xenograft transplantation, which he performed to save a young girl who was unable to live without artificial life support as her second aortic valve was replaced. Along with these transplants, he also continued his medical researches that comprised of ways to decelerate aging process. The years followed with several recognitions and awards such as Dag Hammarskjold International Prize and Peace Prize, the Milan International Prize for Science, the Kennedy Foundation Award the title of ‘Professor Emeritus’ in 1984.
 
Retirement
For a while, he stopped performing transplants and spent more time in research. He retired in 1983, as the Head of the Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery in Cape Town. Barnard had developed rheumatoid arthritis in his hands that almost restricted his career as a surgeon. After retiring, he worked as Scientist-In-Residence for two years in U.S at the Oklahoma Transplantation Institute and was also an acting consultant in various institutes. Though Barnard was very interested with the works on the anti-aging treatment, his career suffered a downfall in 1986, when he promoted an expensive anti-aging skin cream, Glycel. Most of his later years was spent in Austria where he setup the Christiaan Barnard Foundation, an effort laid to help the under privileged children of the world.
 
Major Books By Christiaan Barnard
2 Autobiographies - One Life, 1969, and The Second Life, 1993   
Arthritis Handbook
50 Ways to a Healthy Heart
The Best Medicine
Christiaan Barnard's Program for Living With Arthritis
The Donor
Heart Attack: You Don't Have to Die 
Personal Life
Christiaan Barnard was first married in 1948 to Aletta Gertruida Louw, a nurse whom he met while practicing medicine in Ceres. Deirdre and Andre were born to this couple. Barnard was more bothered about acquiring International fame, which led to their divorce in 1969. Later in 1970, he married Barbara Zoellner who was only 19 years then and they had two children Frederick and Christiaan Jr. In 1982, he divorced Zoellner and got married again in 1988 to Karin Setzkorn, a young model. Though they had two children, this marriage also did not last long and ended in 2000. "The heart transplant wasn't such a big thing surgically," he said. "The point is I was prepared to take the risk. My philosophy is that the biggest risk in life is not to take the risk." These were his words to the Time magazine just before his death. Barnard passed away while he was on vacation in Paphos, Cyrus when he was 78 years old. He died on 2 September 2001.
CHRISTIAAN BARNARD TIMELINE
Christiaan Barnard was born on 8 November
1940:
Completed schooling at Beaufort West High School
1945:
Pursued medical education from University of Cape Town, Medical School obtained his MB ChB
1948:
