King Features History : King Features Syndicate
King Features Syndicate
Introduction
There might have been newspaper comics without William Randolph Hearst, but it’s hard to imagine what they’d have been like. With Hearst’s aggressive support, the “funnies” thrived through the tumultuous early years and evolved into one of this country’s few indigenous art forms. It was the publishing magnate Hearst who grasped the potential of the earliest “Sunday funnies” and turned them into a big, booming, modern business enterprise eventually syndicating them from New York City into America’s hamlets and valleys, opening the gates for the great parade of comic stars to come. In the process, Hearst pioneered the art of promoting pen-and-ink personalities and furthered the careers of many brilliant cartoonists, while largely shaping the popular tastes of several generations of comics fans. Since 1895 when Hearst first set his sights on the Yellow Kid, the comics have reflected and contributed to our language and culture. They’ve also sold a lot of newspapers. Today, more than 60 years after Hearst’s death, the comics claim an estimated 113 million loyal readers in the United States and millions more worldwide and that’s just on Sundays.
The Birth of King
In the early days of American journalism, smaller newspapers did not have the facilities to reproduce artwork or generate much coverage except local reports; and many larger newspapers found it difficult to maintain staffs of artists, writers, cartoonists, fiction authors and columnists who could offer diversity in their pages. As early as the 1840s some urban newspapers composed preset pages of general news and humor for sale to rural newspapers and, in the 1880s, S.S. McClure contracted with writers such as Robert Louis Stevenson to offer their works a chapter at a time to a list of subscribing newspapers. William Randolph Hearst burst upon the newspaper scene in 1887, turning The San Francisco Examiner into the West Coast’s largest, most controversial and most interesting newspaper. Hearst spanned the continent and established The New York Journal in 1895. It was in Joseph Pulitzer’s New York World that cartoonist Richard Outcault’s legendary Yellow Kid made his newspaper debut in 1895, but it was Hearst’s New York Journal that cannily snatched the Kid away from the rival sheet in 1896 and deployed him as a key weapon in the historic newspaper circulation wars. With Hearst’s encouragement, Outcault developed The Yellow Kid from its beginnings as a simple gag panel into the first true example of the comic strip. The Kid led the charge in Hearst’s trailblazing American Humorist comic supplement with its famous motto: “Eight Pages of Iridescent Polychromous Effulgence That Makes the Rainbow Look Like a Lead Pipe.” Pulitzer fought back hard by hiring another artist to draw Outcault’s character for the World. The publishers’ fierce battle over the bald urchin in the yellow nightshirt led bystanders to refer to sensational, screaming-headline newspaper combat as “yellow journalism.” The popularity of that expression tainted the early comics as a less-than-genteel entertainment, but it also made it clear that the “funnies” had become serious business, seemingly overnight. The Kid holds title as the star of the first successful comic feature, but it was years before his debut that a troupe of little bears first appeared in Hearst’s San Francisco Examiner, demonstrating the power of continuing characters to engage readers. Cartoonist James Swinnerton’s drawings of little bears and tykes appeared only as spot illustrations, but they had personality, and they became the first comic characters to appear repeatedly in newsprint.
Hearst’s Comics Increase Sales
In 1897, having grasped the potential of compelling comic characters to sell newspapers, Hearst remembered two mischievous German lads from the picture books of his childhood Max and Moritz, their names were and ordered cartoonist Rudolph Dirks to create a couple of pranksters just like them. The Katzenjammer Kids were a sensation from the start, expanding into other newspapers and becoming one of the public’s best-loved comic features. The Katzenjammer Kids became the first to regularly incorporate sequential narrative panels with speech balloons, further defining the modern comic strip. Mamma Katzenjammer’s little troublemakers landed in court for a time as the focus of a historic comic custody battle. But The Katzenjammer Kids kept going, and the strip still appears in newspapers worldwide today. It is the oldest comic strip in syndication. In 1900, Hearst introduced the slapstick antics of Frederick Opper’s Happy Hooligan, who also became immensely popular with the public. Together Opper, Swinnerton, Outcault and Dirks are credited as the main founding fathers of the modern comic strip, but its growth was also shaped by Hearst’s determination to see the “funnies” reach their full potential. By the turn of the century, other publishers across the country were scrambling to get good comics into their newspapers and experimenting with ways to present them. Hearst continued to lead the way, expanding his empire, seeking out and hiring top talent both cartoonists and writers and offering newspapers across the country early comic favorites as well as more serious fare on social, political and moral issues — today’s op-ed pieces. In the early 1900s, before Mutt and Jeff became the stars of the first regular daily newspaper strip, early black-and-white comics had begun appearing sporadically on weekdays in Hearst newspapers. In 1912, Hearst’s New York Evening Journal introduced the first full page of daily comics on weekdays. Hearst’s comic features were among the first to be reprinted in booklet form. The popularity of such reprints set the stage for modern comic books. In 1912, Hearst’s International Film Service was among the pioneer animation studios, making movie stars out of the characters from the Hearst newspaper strips, including Bringing Up Father, Happy Hooligan, Maud the Mule, Krazy Kat and a raft of others.
1915: A Crowning Achievement
To meet the burgeoning demand for quality newspaper features, Hearst eventually consolidated his distribution operations. In 1909, he had dispatched a trusted lieutenant, Moses Koenigsberg, on a four-year tour of the country to assess local newspaper conditions. Koenigsberg returned with well-formed conceptions of an organization that could offer a large menu of features from which newspapers could pick and choose to make their content more varied and interesting. But even Koenigsberg’s grand vision proved modest in comparison to the response from newspapers hungry for quality material. In 1913 he formed the Newspaper Feature Service under the Hearst umbrella. Subscribers were able to buy such front-line features as Buster Brown, Polly and Her Pals and Dimples (by Grace Drayton, creator of the Campbell Soup Kids), and a full spectrum of text material. Hearst discovered that any lingering doubts about features packages were only because others earlier material was inferior. The response to the Newspaper Feature Service was so great it couldn’t grow according to demand and remain profitable. So, in 1915, again under Koenigsberg’s management, a new syndicate was born. To make it appear separate from his other operations, Hearst sought a distinctive name, and a solution was quickly found in Koenigsberg’s own name. “King” is the English translation of the German “Koenig,” and the implications were obvious: the new syndicate would reign over the syndication business. On Nov. 16, 1915, King Features Syndicate was incorporated.
Hearst Promotes Creative Genius
Hearst put hit after hit into newspapers as the years went by: Blondie (which today, 85 years after its launch, ranks among the top five strips in circulation), Thimble Theater (home-port of Popeye), Flash Gordon, Tillie the Toiler, The Phantom and many, many more. Hearst sought out premier talent and paid handsomely. Many a cartoonist became a gentleman working for Hearst: Bringing Up Father’s George McManus in particular lived like an emir in Southern California, always a welcome guest at Hearst’s storied San Simeon estate. Hearst brought Walt Disney’s Mickey Mouse into the funny papers. He commissioned the likes of Western novelist Zane Grey, mystery writer Dashiell Hammett and big-game hunter Frank Buck to create strips for him. An influx of cartooning talent swelled the “bullpen” at Hearst’s King Features Syndicate, making it the MGM of the comics business. At the same time, Hearst promoted the work of other creators of cartoons, text and sports columns, including Rube Goldberg, Harry Hershfield, Nell Brinkley, George Bernard Shaw, Maxim Gorky, Marshal Foch, Cornelius Vanderbilt, Damon Runyon, Jack Dempsey and Gene Tunney. Today, with its affiliated syndicates, King Features distributes three times as many comic features as its next-largest competitor. While Hearst expertly exploited the circulation-building powers of comics, he was also among their biggest fans. Obliged though he was to spend much of his time overseeing his empire and hobnobbing with heads of state, Hearst loved his “funnies” and followed them faithfully, keeping a paternal eye on every one. He is said to have ritually spread comic sections from a dozen different cities out on the floor each Sunday, turning the pages with his toes. Hearst was particularly proud of George Herriman’s cult-favorite, Krazy Kat, which remains a favorite of artists and intellectuals, who hailed it then and now as a masterpiece of 20th century art. Although the strip never achieved more than a modest circulation, Hearst ignored financial considerations and refused to consider canceling the strip, keeping it in newspapers until Herriman’s death in 1944. Hearst also deeply admired Hal Foster’s epic Prince Valiant, ensuring that it ran in its original full broadsheet size in his newspapers, years after most other major features had been cut back to half-page formats, or less. Well into his 80s, Hearst insisted on personally approving new comics for syndication. One of the last strips to receive his thumbs up was a newcomer called Beetle Bailey.
Comics Go To War
During World War I, a major newspaper association tried to suspend the printing of comics to conserve paper. The new and fragile art form might not have survived if William Randolph Hearst’s valued lieutenant, Moses Koenigsberg, had not convinced the publishers that comic strips were the home front’s best Morale Officers. As World War II heated up, Snuffy Smith came down from the hills to defend our shores. The futuristic Flash Gordon strip featured heroes wearing American army-type uniforms and evil aliens resembling Axis enemies. And back home, Blondie instructed children in neighborhood salvage drives. Cartoonist Dave Bregar first tagged the enlisted man as “G.I. Joe” in his strip, Private Bregar. When the war turned cold, Private Bregar returned to civilian life. Beetle Bailey, who started out as a college cutup and enlisted by mistake during the Korean conflict, has remained in the Army since 1951. Roy Crane’s Buz Sawyer moved from the military to espionage during the Cold War and Milton Caniff’s Steve Canyon intrigued millions of readers with his adventures.
Women’s Changing Roles
Since the early days, King Features has represented women cartoonists, including Rose O’Neill (The Kewpies), Grace Drayton (who, in addition to kid and animal strips, created the Campbell Soup Kids) and Nell Brinkley. Today, Bunny Hoest produces the popular panel, The Lockhorns, and a comic-strip package dubbed Six Chix features the work of six different women cartoonists each week. Among the columnists, Dorothy Dix and Beatrice Fairfax became pioneer women writers for King, and gossip columnists Louella Parson and Dorothy Kilgallen defined the genre. Heloise has passed along hints to grateful readers for years, and Dr. Joyce Brothers and Dr. Ruth Westheimer found themselves among the most popular and influential names in newspapers. Through the years, King comics have reflected the advances of women in society. As the name implies, Tillie the Toiler starred a working woman, still a novelty when Russ Westover created the strip in 1921. But by the time Greg Howard created Sally Forth in 1982, modern women could easily identify with their comic-strip counterpart whose daily struggle to juggle motherhood and career is chronicled in the comics pages.
Growing Up With the Comics
Out of the mouths of babes come wisecracks, wisdom and social commentary. Generations of cartoonists have created comic-strip kids to point readers toward truths about our society. From his first appearance in the New York World in 1895, R.F. Outcault’s famous jug-eared, yellow-nightshirted boy from the slums captured the public’s imagination. The Yellow Kid made his debut in two simple gag panels titled “At the Circus in Hogan’s Alley.” By 1896, Outcault abandoned the gag panel format in favor of panels with progressive narration. He later added dialogue, creating the first true example of the comic strip. In 1902, Outcault created a very different kind of kid for Sunday newspapers. Featuring a well-dressed, literate son of suburbia and his bulldog, Tige, the famous Buster Brown character wrote weekly resolutions not to repeat the nefarious pranks that always landed him in hot water. Modern newspaper readers can see Buster Browns spiritual descendant in Hank Ketcham’s Dennis the Menace, who will celebrate 65 years as the half-pint master of mischief in 2016. The Katzenjammer Kids (1897) remains the oldest comic strip still in syndication today. Although the irascible twins Rudolph Dirks created have been drawn by many artists throughout the years, they have continued to inspire a long line of comics whose stars, like most of growing up, rebel against the authority of parents, school and society. For example, Tom Batiuk chronicles the adventures of a varied cast of characters at Westview High School in Funky Winkerbean (1972), while Jim Borgman and Jerry Scott present a dead-on target portrait of teenage angst in Zits (1998). Both strips have gained widespread popularity among teens and their parents because they accurately reflect the trials and tribulations with which modern youngsters must cope. In addition, in recent years, educators and social service agencies have cited Tom Batiuks special Funky series on more serious issues, such as teen-age pregnancy, teen suicide and teen dating abuse for their efforts at public education. Bob Weber Jr., first created Slylock Fox and Comics for Kids in 1987 as a Sunday page. Now a seven-days-a-week activity feature, it attracts youngsters with a charming cast of regular characters who teach useful skills through fun activities.
Breaking Through the Color Barrier
From the first appearance of The Yellow Kid in 1895, color has been an integral part of the comics appeal. But it has taken decades to break through the color barriers and eliminate ethnic stereotypes that have reflected America’s ambivalent attitudes toward its multiracial population. Early comic strip portraits of ethnic and racial groups frequently appear offensive after the passage of several generations. For example, Abie the Agent, a strip about a Jewish businessman, was drawn in the teens by the prominent humorist Harry Hershfield. Although today it seems crude in its depiction of Jews, it was hailed in its day as the first comic strip specifically for adults and as a major weapon in the campaign to encourage sympathy and amity between mainstream American society and newer immigrant groups. Through the years, the stereotypes changed on both sides of the drawing board. In the 1930s, King Features signed the first major African-American cartoonist to draw a syndicated feature, E. Simms Campbell, creator of Cuties. And when Morrie Turner created Wee Pals in 1964, he became the first African-American cartoonist to draw a major strip featuring kids of various racial and ethnic backgrounds. A nationwide slogan was coined as America adopted Turner’s trademark “Rainbow Power.” At first, some Southern newspapers dropped Mort Walkers Beetle Bailey when Lt. Flap marched into Camp Swampy in 1972. But the first positive African-American role model was successfully integrated into an already existing strip and circulation continued to soar. Curtis, Ray Billingsley’s charming strip about a modern African-American family, was launched in 1988. And Mamas Boyz, by Jerry Craft, follows the lives of Pauline Porter and her two teenage sons Tyrell and Yusuf. Today, cartoonists find society has changed enough to allow them to keep their cast’s color incidental to the comic strips story line.
Love, Adventure & Romance
Like the silver-screen serials and later TV soap operas, serialized stories in the newspapers satisfied the American appetite with a daily dose of adventure, mystery and melodrama. Top authors such as Agatha Christie and Dashiell Hammett had their work serialized for syndication by King, and through the years, the syndicate launched many story strips whose stars remain part of the world’s popular culture. Space adventurer Flash Gordon, created by Alex Raymond in 1934, has always been considered top-notch science fiction. The world watched in amazement as Flash Gordon introduced space hardware that later became reality, including laser beams, ionic propulsion rockets and weather satellites. The Wall Street Journal observed that the blockbuster “Star Wars” movies owe their “most obvious debt to Flash Gordon.” With the introduction of Mandrake the Magician (1934) and The Phantom (1936), Lee Falk created a new genre: the superhero strip. Mandrake began as an actual caped magician, complete with top hat. The master illusionist and hypnotist was endowed with supernatural powers, but later became more human, relying on superior intelligence and courage to triumph over his evil enemies. The Phantom, a hooded, mysterious, legendary figure, carries on a long tradition of crime fighting begun in the 16th century and passed from father to son. Lee Falk’s creations served as inspiration for many other cartoonists and remain popular with readers around the world today. Considered “The Rembrandt of the Comics,” Milton Caniff inspired many imitators with his celebrated adventure strips, Terry and the Pirates and Steve Canyon. In a 1950 cover story, Newsweek called him “the most widely aped artisan” and praised him as “unexcelled in his line as an artist and story smith.” Today cinema-studies teachers cite Caniff as a master of lighting and composition and use his work to teach the mechanics of filmmaking. While adventure strips captured the imagination of male readers, many women became hooked on romance stories. Mary Worth, one of the earliest strips in this genre, first appeared in 1938 and remains one of the longest-running continuity strips, or “comic-page soap operas” – a genre dedicated to the millions of readers who thrive on continued stories told in brief daily episodes with cliffhanger endings. Most of the plot lines of strips in this genre once routinely dealt with broken hearts and cases of mistaken identity. However, Mary Worth and other strips that have survived have done so because they have reflected the changes in American society and the growing sophistication of readers. For example, through the years, Mary Worth has confronted such issues as juvenile delinquency, unwed motherhood, drug addiction, spousal abuse, alcoholism, infidelity, concerns of the elderly and the generation gap. Three other popular strips that followed Mary Worth, Rex Morgan, M.D. (1948), Judge Parker (1952) and Apartment 3-G (1952), riveted audiences to the comics pages by weaving pressing social issues such as teen pregnancies, drug abuse and corruption into their “soap opera” plots.
Family Entertainment
From the earliest days of the comics, cartoonists have centered their humor on the mainstay of human existence the family. Chic Young created Blondie in 1930. His heroine was a gold-digging flapper, her boyfriend Dagwood was heir to the Bumstead family fortune, and the screwball comedy of their mismatched courtship was meant to take America’s mind off the Depression. But Young’s vision did not capture Americas imagination until Dagwood went on a hunger strike to protest his parents’ opposition to his impending marriage to Blondie. The couple married and Dagwood was promptly disinherited. For it was then that Young hit upon the magic formula: Blondie and Dagwood moved to suburbia, had children and lived happily ever after in domestic situations that people could easily identify with in the sobering post-20s era. Their popularity continued to soar until Blondie became one of the most widely circulated comic strips in history. Blondie inspired 28 successful feature films from 1938 to 1951. Penny Singleton played Blondie and Arthur Lake, Dagwood. The comic also inspired a television series and a novel. Through Dean Young, who assumed creative direction of the feature after his father’s death in 1973, Blondie has been featured on CBS television in two prime-time animated specials. Following the Korean conflict, Beetle Bailey went home on furlough to visit his sister, Lois. People preferred the perennial private in uniform, so Beetle returned to Camp Swampy. But Lois acquired a husband, kids and, like many of their fans, a home in the suburbs. Created by Mort Walker in collaboration with Dik Browne, and now written and drawn by their sons, Brian and Greg Walker and Robert (“Chance”) Browne, Hi and Lois became one of the worlds most successful family comics. When Dik Browne created Hagar the Horrible in 1973 from the basement laundry room of his Connecticut home, he had no idea his lovable Viking would eventually conquer the hearts of newspaper readers around the world. Hagar’s barbarian costume fooled no one. Fans around the world instantly recognized themselves and their families in Browne’s warm and touching portrayal. Likewise, readers of Bil Keane’s world-famous panel, The Family Circus, identify with his strong emotional portraits of family life. Mommy, Daddy, Billy, Dolly, Jeffy and PJ reflect the joy and beauty of their relationships with loving and gentle humor. Bunny Hoest, on the other hand, uses a sharp and satiric wit to depict a different side of family life. In The Lockhorns, she exposes the strong and loving relationship between Leroy and Loretta by finding humor in their constant bickering and uproariously funny battling.
The Classics
Through his illustrated column, Looping the Loop, created for the Chicago American, Elzie Segar attracted the attention of Arthur Brisbane, a great newspaperman of the Hearst organization. When he accepted a job at King Features Syndicate in New York, Segar was told to create a comic strip based on the title “Thimble Theatre.” He gave free rein to his imagination and almost overnight created the Oyl family, featuring Olive Oyl, Caster Oyl and Ham Gravy. Segar was greatly influenced by the artistic genius of two men: silent-film great Charlie Chaplin and cartoonist George Herriman, creator of Krazy Kat. Many of the elements in the early Thimble Theatre recall the little tramps comedies, including the huge black-bearded villain, the little hero and, of course, the damsel in distress. And, admiring Herriman’s ability to paint a picture with his pen, Segar alluded to Herriman’s style in the backgrounds and figures he created for his own feature. Segar loved storytelling and the continuing adventures of his new characters proved overwhelmingly popular with the public. In a story released Jan. 17, 1929, Castor Oyl and Ham Gravy planned to seek their fortune on Dice Island. Not having the slightest idea of how to “drive a boat” there, they headed for the waterfront to find an experienced sailor. Castor hired the only man in need of a job and odd-looking, one-eyed character with a jutting chin. Newspaper readers who turned to the comic that day could not know they had witnessed the birth of a legend: Popeye. Although at first he had no intention of keeping Popeye in his strip, Segar soon found he had underestimated his own instincts and the power of his creation. With his fundamental honesty and loyalty, his unshakable belief in right and wrong, his famous “twisker-sock” punch (reserved for thwarting villains) and his true love for his pickle-nosed “sweet patootie” Olive Oyl, Popeye was destined to become one of the worlds greatest folk heroes. Popeye’s universal appeal as a comic-strip character invariably led to his phenomenal success in other media. Popeye comic books have been published around the world. In 1932, Fleischer Studios created the first of the Popeye cartoons considered classics today in the art of animation. The advent of television in the 1950s brought Popeye into millions of home and continuous TV exposure has endeared him to each new generation of viewers. In 1980, Paramount Pictures produced “Popeye,” a full-length musical motion picture that has become a cult classic. The spinach-chomping sailor has inspired manufacturers and advertisers the world over to capitalize on his popularity and appeal as a positive role model. Today there are hundreds of licensees worldwide for Popeye merchandise, advertising and public service campaigns. Universally acclaimed as one of the most original and influential comic creations of all time, George Herriman’s Krazy Kat appeared in William Randolph Hearst’s newspapers for 31 years until his death in 1944. The strip won immediate favor with the public and has inspired many other cartoonists, artists and writers. Herriman’s characters, caught in an eternal love triangle, caper through an imaginary country filled with endlessly shifting and shadowy skies, brilliant burnt-orange buttes and mesas, flapjack moons and lunatic cacti in Navajo flowerpots. Distinctively spare and graphically complete, Herriman’s drawings flow as spontaneously as his mellifluous use of language. Krazy Kat, Ignatz Mouse and Offissa Pup speak logical nonsense in rhythms Joycean in their individuality and jazz-like in their improvisational technique. On its deepest philosophical level, Krazy Kat portrays the eternal struggle between the world’s light and dark forces, a struggle in which, for Herriman, the only conquering force is Love. Prince Valiant remains unique in the world of contemporary comics. A Sunday-only historical novel in serialized form, it brings to life in full color the noble, heraldic themes of Arthurian legend, one of the most persistent folk and literary traditions of Western civilization. Prince Valiant was created by Hal Foster in 1937. He passed the baton to master illustrator John Cullen Murphy in 1970, and from 1979, he turned the writing duties over to his son, author and editor Cullen Murphy. The Sunday page is penned today by Mark Schultz and Thomas Yeates.
 
