Bikini Bottom – From SpongePedia, the biggest SpongeBob-wiki in the world!
Bikini Bottom
A map of Bikini Bottom
Bikini Bottom is a fictional city that appears in the Nickelodeon animated television comedy, SpongeBob SquarePants . Located at the bottom of the Pacific Ocean, underneath the World War 2 nuclear test site Bikini Atoll, it is the setting in which the series' main characters live, and where most of the episodes take place.
Bikini Bottom is similar to an average American city. The population is estimated at 50,000 but the urban/metro area (including Jellyfish Fields ) has a population of around 4.5 million . The city consists of various businesses, including restaurants, stores, and manufacturers. The city has a stable economy, a balanced education system, questionable health care(as seen in "The Lost Mattress"), a structured government, and a firm law enforcement system. There are even stadiums, amusement parks, and other recreational facilities. Bikini Bottom first was mentioned in the episode: Plankton! but first appeared in the episode: Hall Monitor .
Contents
Rock Bottom
The city is divided by its main road, Conch Street, which runs from downtown, past the homes of SpongeBob, Squidward, and Patrick, through the Krusty Krab restaurant, The Chum Bucket and the Reef Theatre cinema.
In every episode in which the skyline of Bikini Bottom is shown, features such as buildings, houses and an anchor can be seen. In earlier episodes of the series, a red flower arch can be seen, which no longer appears in the skyline. In some episodes, a lighthouse appears in the skyline, most likely Mrs. Puff's Boating School . Other episodes feature the Krusty Krab's Marquee. A large clam-shaped structure, most likely a propeller from a ship, is seen in some episodes.
In the center of Bikini Bottom, the citizens work and live in large, gray buildings made of metal. There are some other forms of buildings, mostly aquatic-themed as seen above. Further out from the town citizens need to use whatever is available and easy to live in, such as Patrick's rock, SpongeBob’s hollowed-out pineapple and the stone monument Squidward lives in.
Inhabitants
Although the population of Bikini Bottom is uncertain, Stephen Hillenburg, the creator of the show, confirmed that Bikini Bottom is a large city. Before almost leaving the city, Sandy Cheeks sang a song about the city, describing it as "Crowded and Smoggy," which are the characteristics of Los Angeles, although the physical look & feel of Bikini Bottom suggests that it is in fact a much smaller city. A one-time Pretty Patties joint created by SpongeBob attracted 46,853 customers. Almost everyone from the city is there, which may suggest a population of around 50,000 Bikini Bottomites. In the episode, Squilliam Returns , Squidward mentions Bikini Bottom is a "hick town", meaning it is probably quite small like most hick towns. On "Krusty Towers", Squidward mentions Bikini Bottom is in the middle of scenic nowhere; which could mean it is very small, which is the criteria of isolated cities. On Nautical Novice , Mrs. Puff says "We're going to flatten millions of innocent lives!"; which could mean that there are around 1,000,000 people in Bikini Bottom. But in the episode What Ever Happened to SpongeBob? there is a sign that says: Welcome to Bikini Bottom- Population: 538. Many years had passed so currently there might be only 538 people living in Bikini Bottom.
Housing
Bikini Bottom has many houses. All of the main characters have one and they are all different.
Glove World
Animals
In Bikini Bottom, animals are similar to those "animals" in the real world. Some are treated as pets, while others live in the wild.
A majority of "animals" live in the wild. First, Jellyfish are similar to bees. There are many different types of Jellyfish that live in Bikini Bottom. Pink are the most common, but they also come in green, blue, orange, yellow,and purple. In the episode The Secret Box SpongeBob states that Patrick may have the worlds only albino jellyfish. Jellyfish reside mainly in Jellyfish Fields , which has a population of four million Jellyfish. They make and live in hives, another similarity to real-world bees. In earlier episodes, jellyfish were plain pink. And later on, more jellyfish began to appear with spots, but plain pink ones still exist. Jellyfish are similar to cows in that they can be "milked" for their fresh jellyfish jelly. The jelly, which can be taken from the hive or from the actual jellyfish, is probably the Bikini Bottom version of honey (considering jellyfish are bees). Second, scallops are similar to birds. They are usually found in groups at Goo Lagoon, particularly acting as seagulls. Scallops are usually orange or purple. There is also a colossal clam named Clamu in Oyster Stadium. It's currently a mother of one. Also, the medium-sized variants of clams are shown to be similar to wolves (like in the episodes Texas , when they were seen howling, and The Thing , when Squidward was attacked by a clam in the truck) and the larger variants are likely to be similar to non-sentient whales (like Clamu).  Third, sea slugs were seen in the video game, SpongeBob SquarePants: SuperSponge. They are known to dislike everyone. Fourth, seahorses, which are similar to horses, can be ridden and are very interested in food. SpongeBob kept a Seahorse in the episode, "My Pretty Seahorse" and named it " Mystery ".
Fifth, the "Alaskan Bull Worm" is a large, omnivorous worm that attacked various parts of Bikini Bottom in its sleep in, "Sandy, SpongeBob, and the Worm". It eventually went on to destroy the entire city. Sixth, sea urchins, which are small "bug-like" creatures whose bites cause severe itchiness (a possible similarity to fire ants or mosquitoes). Seventh, Nematodes, which are worm-like creatures that travel in groups and consume common objects by eating or drinking them (a possible similarity to termites). They once destroyed SpongeBob's house by sucking the pineapple juice out of it and one time they almost destroyed the Krusty Krab. Eighth, rays , which are eagles . Other "animals" are treated as pets. Two well-known "pets" are snails and worms. Snails are similar to cats (because they "meow") and are common as pets, but they are also known to lurk in alleys and forests. A well-known character Gary the Snail is one of them. Worms are similar to dogs (because they bark) and these are also common as pets. At one point SpongeBob also owned a worm named Rex, an angry snail named Larry and a jellyfish.
In Different Times
Bikini bottom dates back to an extremely long time ago.
Basic Prehistoric Era
Bikini Bottom traces back to when Primate Sponge and Prehistoric Patrick lived. This was seen in the episode, " SB-129 ". Back then, everything was full of prehistoric jungles and sponge-eating plants.
Advanced Prehistoric Era
The Advanced Prehistoric Era was seen in the episode, "Ugh!". In this episode, you saw the lives of SpongeGar , Patar and Squog . In this time, things were much more advanced, with a language system and basic housing. There were still only three known housings; SpongeBob's, Patrick's, and Squidward's. There were many jungles. There were also foghorn-like creatures, and Prehistoric Krabs , (Mr. Krabs a la caveman). This era can also be seen in Atlantis SquarePantis .Some of the technology they discovered is the club,fire and pets
Medieval Times
Then called Bikini Bottomshire, Medieval Times was seen in the episode, "Dunces and Dragons". The totalitarian tyrant Planktonamor reigned for a short time until SpongeBob and Patrick were sent by King Krabs to rescue Princess Pearl and slay the Dragon Jellyfish , much like many medieval tales.
Places
King Krabs' Castle:
A massive Castle that King Krabs and Princess Pearl lived in. There was a prophecy on the wall, a guillotine and a dungeon in which Squidly lived for a short time.This maybe the medieval Krusty Krabs.
Planktonamor's Tower:
Planktonamor's tower was gargantuan and the only things that lived there were Planktonamor , Glass Ball Karen and the fearsome Dragon Jellyfish . It contained a huge spiral staircase.Maybe this is the medieval Chum Bucket.
The Village:
The Village was the main area of Bikini Bottom in medieval times. There was a hospital, a hotel, Ye Old Bowling Alley, an old-folks home and a massive area of farmland.
Armor Shop:
The Armor Shop was a store that sold armor and weapons and even made them. There was only one known employee, the owner.
Western Times
In Western times, Bikini Bottom is called Dead Eye Gulch in which Dead Eye Plankton rules the entire town and everything there is owned by Dead Eye Plankton. So every store here except for The Krusty Kantina was named after Dead Eye Plankton, seen in the episode, Pest of the West . The stores and houses in Dead Eye Gulch are made up of wood. Cacti are seen in most parts. Skulls of dead animals can be seen. Seahorses and coffins are used for transportation.
Places
The Krusty Kantina :
The Krusty Kantina is owned by Mr. Krabs' Western Ancestor . The Krusty Kantina was going bankrupt for Dead Eye Plankton kept all the money The Krusty Kantina earned. The Krusty Kantina had a stage that Mrs. Puff's Western Ancestor used to dance. The Krusty Kantina also owned a piano, that worked by putting a coin inside the coin slot. The only one who played the piano was Squidward's Western Ancestor . The Krusty Kantina only served milk for they were still in search of a fry cook.
Dead Eye Funeral Parlor and Ice Cream Parlor:
Dead Eye Funeral Parlor and Ice Cream Parlor is a place where you get hand made coffins and ice cream at the same time.
Old Dead Tree Hill:
Old Dead Tree Hill was a cemetery for all of the past sheriffs who had been killed by Dead Eye Plankton; unfortunately this cemetery was already full.
Boot Hill:
Dead Eye Boot Hill was the 2nd cemetery built for the past sheriffs that had been killed by Dead Eye Plankton.
41st century
In the 41st century, everything will be painted in chrome, and the only residents known are the robots SpongeTron , Patron and the chrome-workers. The only place seen in the 41st century was the futuristic Krusty Krab . Squidward traveled here by running into a freezer to hide, and then getting stuck and freezing himself solid until SpongeTron found him many, many years later.
51st century
The 51st century was seen in the episode SpongeHenge . Then chrome was not used, and there are aliens instead of fish that are in glass containers. The Three Aliens also discovered the SpongeBob Stones .
Trade
The Krusty Krab is Bikini Bottom's premier eatery. It is made up of the kitchen, bathroom, eating area and Mr. Krabs' office.
-Employees: SpongeBob and Squidward. Former employees including Jim, Stanley S. SquarePants and Patrick (as Patricia one time).
-Manager: Mr. Eugene Krabs
Chum Bucket
This is a restaurant run by Plankton. He only got  one customer but he was paid by Karen, Plankton's wife, to do it to cheer him up. In one episode, Plankton says," I only got one customer. There he is." He then points to a dead rat on one of the tables, next to a partly bitten Chum Burger.
-Manager: Sheldon J. Plankton
Shell Shack
The Shell Shack is a popular restaurant at an unknown location. It was mentioned only once in the series in the episode Patty Hype when Tom and Fred met into the street and says "There's a talking dog over at the Shell Shack!" Later he mentioned that the talking dog was singing.
The Bikini Bottom Jail
Bikini Bottom has its fair share of criminals such as Plankton and the TattleTale Strangler . Mr. Krabs has been known to steal, or "borrow" as he calls it. Mrs. Puff or Squidward are always blamed for the crimes actually committed by SpongeBob or Patrick and are either arrested or fined to do community service. At one point, a bomb exploded inside the Krusty Krab , and as a result, a hole was made in the rear of the building. The bomb itself, which had the total energy of a nuclear bomb had been made in a factory. Or so the pirates who sold it to Squidward said. There is also the punishment of execution by King Neptune, such as for stealing his crown. Bikini Bottom has two prisons: The Institution for the Criminally Tiny and Bikini Bottom Jail for everyone else. The underwater city has its own courthouse, headed by a female fish judge. In future episodes, the judge is a male. The Bikini Bottom Police Department is a reasonably fair organization, despite arresting citizens for no real reason whatsoever, and has been known to imprison SpongeBob and Patrick for their crime of stealing balloons and then releasing them to tell the two that it was National Free Balloon Day. In the game SpongeBob SquarePants: Creature from the Krusty Krab, the army makes an appearance. It seems the army is made out of helicopters with giant nets (used to capture Plankton), tanks that shoot blue flames, special laser machines, electric fields and bomb-throwing tanks.
Infernal Island is a faraway island where SpongeBob went to when he missed his boat to Sun n' Fun Island.
Military/Defense
Besides the Bikini Bottom Police Force , Bikini Bottom has two known forms of defense. It probably has a military for in the episode Good Neighbors a military tank can be seen with a soldier inside. It is also unknown if Bikini Bottom has any military installations. Mr. Krabs served in the Navy, and the Navy has been mentioned in a few episodes. There has also been a navy reunion in the episode: Shell of a Man
Education
Bikini Bottom High School
Bikini Bottom High School
The place where Pearl Krabs and her friends go to school. There is a Gym where dances are held.
Bikini Bottom Elementary
The younger kid’s school.
Bikini Bottom Middle School
Not shown for junior fish.
Kindergarten
The place where Timmy went in SquidBob TentaclePants
Transportation
Bikini Bottom has a wide array of different transportation systems. As in the real world, roads and highways serve Bikini Bottom's buses, taxis, and boats (boats are the underwater equivalent of cars). An airport is seen in Bikini Bottom, as well as a lighthouse near the edge of Goo Lagoon ; helping to avoid late night accidents.  Driving is on the left side of the road, with the steering wheel on the right hand side of the car.
Bikini Bottom's main road is Conch Street. Conch Street runs from SpongeBob's, Patrick's, and Squidward's houses, past the Krusty Krab and the Chum Bucket , and stretches as far as downtown Bikini Bottom. It intersects with Coral Avenue, which is located in downtown Bikini Bottom. A series of highways run just on the outskirts of the city, and in the middle of downtown, a thruway is present. A road leads from Atlantis to Bikini Bottom, as seen in The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie. Another road leads from Bikini Bottom to Rock Bottom , which goes past Glove World Theme Park. An interesting feature of this road is that for a distance it runs straight down a cliff. The only ways up from the bottom are by bus or with a balloon.
The name of the city bus service is Snailways. This bus service stops almost everywhere in Bikini Bottom and beyond (much like a Greyhound Bus). Sandy Cheeks mentioned in a deleted scene of The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie that buses run from Shell City to Bikini Bottom, although SpongeBob and Patrick took alternative transport by riding David Hasselhoff . Like any city, Bikini Bottom has a huge traffic issue, with roads and highways clogged up even in the afternoon. It is very common for somebody coming back from work to be stuck in traffic. The bus drivers do not drive always great because they always stop when you do not want them to.
In the first season they had limousines in submarine shaped. But in the fifth to seventh season they had in its own shaped.
Health
The well-being of an average Bikini Bottomite is unknown, but Bikini Bottom has a few hospitals and health centers, in which doctors make housecalls.
Bikini Bottom Hospital
This hospital is seen in quite a few episodes. Dr. Gill Gilliam is the most well-known doctor that works here. This hospital is known to vary from very good service ( Suds ) to extremely unprofessional service ( The Lost Mattress ). It has also been known to have had actors dressed like doctors infiltrate it for prolonged periods of time.
Weenie Hut General
Weenie Hut General is another hospital for softer folk.
A Veterinary Clinic
In the episode, "Band Geeks", Dr. Gill Gilliam goes to Squidward's house and asks him if there was a dying animal on the premises of his house. Also, in the episode where Gary apparently had mad snail disease where Dr. Gill Gilliam shows his badge showing that he was a snail expert and implying that he was a vet.
Environment
Bikini Bottom is shown to be quite a clean city. Littering is highly prohibited, and the areas around Bikini Bottom are pristine. The only problem is that with high population and the amount of automobiles Bikini Bottom can become very smoggy, as mentioned by Sandy in The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie. Global warming has also affected Bikini Bottom, as seen in the educational short, " The Endless Summer ." In "Industrial Park”, there are many toxic chemicals and pollution.
Culture
The culture of the city is a caricature of contemporary American culture.
The Arts give Bikini Bottom a better outlook on knowledge and creativity. Bikini Bottom houses 3 museums: The Fry Cook Museum, the Hook Museum and the boating museum, seen in Nautical Novice Bikini Bottom also has a music hall, a convention hall, and an Art Society. Squidward Tentacles contributes highly to many of the arts and music Bikini Bottom has to offer.
The Hook Museum
Entertainment in Bikini Bottom contributes to the social interaction within the city. There is the Bubble Bowl, Goofy Goober 's Ice Cream Party Boat (for the kids),which also has a big area next to it, called goober world. in Goober world, there is a racing track, depicted in the SpongeBob Squarepant movie video game. Opposite Goofy Goobers and Goober world, there is a can opener museum, as shown in the comic book Gone Jellyfishing. Weenie Hut Juniors ., Super Weenie Hut Jr., and the Salty Spitoon club (for strong people only) are located somewhere near Goo Lagoon. the Thug Tug and Tough Tavern bars (for tough men only) and The Reef Theatre (cinema). The Krusty Krab houses entertainment with shows such as the Annual Squidward Tentacles Talent Show (featuring the unpopular Squidward Live segment), the Komedy Krab and "Live Nude Pranksters", which featured an unclothed SpongeBob and Patrick. In addition, a popular band called " Ned and the Needlefish " started in Bikini Bottom.
Disasters
Bikini Bottom has been destroyed at least 7 times. Mr. Krabs has started two disasters: the pie bomb and crossing the beam.
Wormy Incident: The citizens suffer from mass hysteria and wreck the town when SpongeBob and Patrick warn them of a monster (really Wormy as a butterfly).
Mad Snail Disease Outbreak: An outbreak of the disease turns residents into zombies (Its really fake), crippling the economy and yet again the other citizens suffer from mass hysteria and wreck the town out of panic.
Squidward's House Attack: Squidward's house turns into a giant robot when the security computer had gone haywire by SpongeBob and Patrick's apology cake and the robot destroys Bikini Bottom.
Alaskan Bull Worm Incident: An Alaskan bull worm enters the city and consumes everything in sight, so the citizens dig up Bikini Bottom and move it into a city-size trench in hopes of escaping the worm's appetite, but the worm falls into the trench when it tries to eat SpongeBob and Sandy and crushes the city, killing most of the citizens.
Pie Bomb Incident: Squidward purchases a pie to make up for employee brotherhood day, despite some of the pirates he bought it from telling him it was made in a bomb factory. When Mr. Krabs tries it, he drops it, and it almost kills the two. SpongeBob then finds it and Squidward and Mr. Krabs find SpongeBob acting like he ate it, and when told SpongeBob will be dead by sunset, Squidward makes sure SpongeBob's last hours are his best and spends quality time with him. At sunset, an explosion occurs, but Squidward finds out it was really a bubble bomb created by SpongeBob, and SpongeBob tell him he was saving the pie so they could share it, but he trips from a rock and the pie drops on Squidward's face, and an explosion the size of a nuclear bomb occurs.
Patrick's song Incident: Patrick wrote a song called I Wrote This , so SpongeBob and Patrick decided to get it on the radio. The people that work in the radio rejected the song, so SpongeBob and Patrick decide to put the record on top of the tower, then it plays throughout Bikini Bottom.  The citizens freak out in chaos and destroying everything (to get rid of Patrick's song).
Crossing The Beams Incident: SpongeBob has to stay in the Krusty Krab,  because there is a stain on one of the plates and the rules say 'The Krusty Krab Must Be Ship-Shape And The Employee Must Not Leave'. SpongeBob therefore uses different machines to clean the plate. Each attempt is unsuccessful until he uses 'The Spotmaster 6000' which consists of a microwave-powered laser particle beam,a  laser-guided high pressure water cannon and a specially woven metal alloy ingeniously combined with state of the art cleaning materials. When he used maximum power (Crossing The Beams) a huge explosion occurs, just before Mr Krabs opens the Krusty Krab doors.
Gummy Incident : Patrick ate Gummy and blew a giant bubble and pop until Bikini Bottom was covered in gooey gum.
Media
Bikini Bottom has many forms of media. News, magazines, radio, and television contribute to Bikini Bottom's wide spread of news and entertainment.
Bikini Bottom News Flash. The city paper is called the Bikini Times. It features the regular news, as well as daily comics. One of the comics is called The Wisenheimers. There is another newspaper that is called the Bikini Bottom Inquirer, which is a parody of The National Inquirer.
There are two science magazines called ' Fake Science Monthly ' and 'Boring Science Digest' seen in the episode: The Camping Episode . Another magazine is called ' Fancy Living Digest '. There is another magazine that is called, 'Long, Tan and Handsome', . There are two dance magazines: 'Dance Now' and 'Interpretive Dance Quarterly'. Another magazine is ' Squid Ink Magazine ' One that is seen in The Paper is Boring Science Digest.
There are many singers and there also appears to be boy bands and rock bands; the first being " Boys Who Cry " (R&B) that Pearl enjoys and " Stingray 5000 " (Album Rock) that Patrick happily found in the dumpster, and " Ned and the Needlefish " (AAA), who appear in the episode: Wigstruck .
there is Bikini Bottom News (television newscast anchored by Perch Perkins and the Realistic Fish Head along with Bob and Barbara ) and many different TV channels such as Sport, Lifestyle, and a "Secret Channel"
Some of the Radio stations in Bikini Bottom are WH20-FM (Adult Top 40), KRUM (Rhythmic-leaning Top 40), and KOLD (Classic Hits/Oldies MOR in the Morning).
Religion
The main religion of Bikini Bottom is unknown but it is shown some inhabitants worship the sea god Neptune,and some worship Poseidon. Two fish were once seen arguing about who was the ruler of the sea. Sandy the squirrel may be of the Christian faith due to the fact that she is from Texas and also brought Christmas to Bikini Bottom.  Also, in one episode, SpongeBob is standing at the window from the kitchen in the Krusty Krab and begins to tell a joke involving a nun when he is suddenly interrupted, thus giving the possibility that the Catholic Church or other churches that have nuns (Anglican, Orthodox) exist, giving way to Christianity.
Sports
The Sports in Bikini Bottom are fairly different to a normal American range of sports. Here is the range.
The Fry Cook Games is a spoof of the Olympic Summer and Winter Games but with fast food. The Fry Cook Games are held at Bikini Bottom's Fast Food Coliseum . The first annual competition was held in 1981. Eugene H. Krabs and Sheldon J. Plankton went head to head against each other until the 21st Fry Cook Games in 2001. There, SpongeBob SquarePants represented the Krusty Krab , and Patrick Star represented The Chum Bucket. In the 21st Fry Cook Games, there were 8 events. The tiebreaker was bun wrestling which no one won.
The Great Snail Race is an annual race between snails at Oyster Stadium , which is located in the Bikini Bottom Zoo. At the pre-game ceremony, of the 102nd Running of the Snail, Lightning Larry Luciano (The winner of the first race) lights the Torch of Good Sportsmanship (although very slowly). After the torch is lit, the games begin. The first snail to make it across the finish line, wins. The result of the 102nd race ended with Rocky (won by default, owned by Patrick Star, actually a Pet Rock) in first place, Snellie (owned by Squidward Tentacles) in second place, and Gary (disqualified, owned by SpongeBob SquarePants) in last place, disqualified due to the coach running on to the race track.
The Anchor Toss Competition and Weightlifting is a contest of strong ocean dwellers tossing a large anchor on a 510+ yard field. A referee goes and measures the distance between the tosser and the anchor, but is constantly hit by it. SpongeBob was part of the contest, along with Sandy Cheeks, Don the Whale , and Larry the Lobster . Weight lifting is very popular at Goo Lagoon. There are even weight lifting competitions at Goo Lagoon. SpongeBob even has a small fitness center at his house. However, instead of weights, SpongeBob uses stuffed animals as weights. SpongeBob has used a stick with two marshmallows attached to it, which he could not lift
Jellyfishing is a fictional sport that is similar to fishing. It involves hunting Jellyfish using a wooden net and a plastic jar. The sport was first introduced in the episode "Jellyfishing." In the episode, the characters SpongeBob and Patrick take their neighbor Squidward to Jellyfish Fields, where many episode plots involving jellyfishing would be set in.
Bubble Blowing is another hobby in Bikini bottom. However, the only bubble blowers known are SpongeBob SquarePants and Patrick Star, although Squidward has blown bubbles before. SpongeBob once set up The Bubblestand in the episode: Bubblestand and charged 25 cents for bubble blowing; 25 cents for lessons. There is a special technique to bubble blowing which SpongeBob invented. Some awkward shapes of bubbles include an elephant, butterflies, worms, among others. Two bubble-themed episodes are " Bubblestand " and " Bubble Buddy ."
Other sports include those that are played by people in the real world, such as weight lifting, swimming, volleyball, Karate , and hot dog eating contests. . Swimming is a very popular sport at Goo Lagoon. There are small circular pools elsewhere in the city. Volleyball is just like the real sport. In Bikini Bottom, volleyball is played at Goo Lagoon. Karate is a popular sport for SpongeBob and Sandy. Some Karate moves include the Double Overhand Squirrel Knot, the Squirrel, and the Tin Cans. Two Karate-themed episodes are "Karate Choppers" and " Karate Island ." A hot dog eating contest is briefly shown during the episode " SpongeGuard on Duty ".
Holidays
Bikini Bottom has its share of holidays. It has five main holidays, as in the real world like:
Valentine's Day (seen in Valentine's Day ) (February 14),
Halloween (seen in Scaredy Pants ) (October 31),
Christmas (seen in Christmas Who? ) (December 25),
Independence Day (seen in Breath Of Fresh Squidward ) (July 4).
Three minor holidays are celebrated in Bikini Bottom, which humans know of like:
Opposite Day (by Squidward seen in Opposite Day ) (January 25)
April Fools Day (seen in Fools in April ) (April 1)
Leif Erikson Day (seen in Bubble Buddy ) (October 9)
Other holidays are not known in the real world, but are known in Bikini Bottom are:
Surfing Competition and Weight Lifting Competition.
National Anthem
Bikini Bottom has its own national anthem, which goes as follows:
Oh, Bikini Bottom,  We pledge our hearts to you! As faithful, as deep, as true, as blue, Bikini Bottom, we love you!
Plankton inside his Krabs robot sang this along with SpongeBob in the episode: Imitation Krabs
Places Beyond Bikini Bottom
Rock Bottom - A place outside Bikini bottom where everything is quite different.
Atlantis - The place where King Neptune , Lord Royal Highness and Princess Mindy live. Also, in the TV movie Atlantis SquarePantis , another kind of creature resides in Atlantis, and they are known only as Atlantians.
