Friends Reunited has closed down: Founder Steve Pankhurst blames Facebook for 'sad decline' of website - Mirror Online
News
Friends Reunited has closed down: Founder Steve Pankhurst blames Facebook for 'sad decline' of website
Service designed to help old friends stay in touch crumbles under pressure from Mark Zuckerberg's all-conquering social network
 Share
Click to playTap to play
The video will start in 8Cancel
Play now
Get daily updates directly to your inbox
+ Subscribe
Thank you for subscribing!
Could not subscribe, try again laterInvalid Email
Friends Reunited has closed down after 15 years of helping old friends stay in touch over the internet.
People who are still on the site's mailing list were told about the closure today in an email from the original founder, who also penned a long and heartfelt essay about his creation.
The website was considered to be one of the first social networks on the web, but simply couldn't compete with modern rivals.
In a Medium post , founder Steve Pankhurst said the business "started to decline with the likes of Facebook taking over social networking".
His announcement was met with sadness on social media, with some loyal users describing it as "the end of an era".
"It hasn’t covered its costs and like any business this can’t continue indefinitely," Pankhurst continued.
"Therefore, whilst it’s sad, I believe it’s time to move on and put Friends Reunited to bed.
"And I feel like I am the right person to do it."
Did you reconnect with someone special using Friends Reunited? Let us know using the form at the bottom of this article or email yourmirror@mirror.co.uk
Read more : Shocking Facebook video shows young child driving truck down motorway
Pankhurst is now working on a website called Liife, which allows people to chart their life in words and images.
He took the chance to have another dig at Facebook, saying that Liife would only allow people to share memories with people who want them.
"One of my biggest gripes with Facebook are the times people tag or share photos of you and everyone sees them," he said.
"And I too don't want to see everyone else’s group party shots. Plus the fact that they are lost in a mass of vacuous information.
"Don’t get me wrong, Facebook is fantastic for lots of things and keeping in touch, but as a tool to plot my life its rather cumbersome."
Pankhurst founded the website back in 1999, when his wife Julie was pregnant with their first child.
It "exploded" in 2001 and became massively popular around the world.
"Just keeping the site going was a challenge under the amount of traffic we were getting," Pankhurst continued.
"Also, the intrusion of the press into your lives could be depressing sometimes — part of the package I suppose."
The website was then sold to ITV in 2005 for £175 million, before eventually being flogged on to DC Thompson for the significantly lower price of just £25 million.
On Twitter - another social network which has helped to clobber Friends Reunited - many cheeky commentators said they were surprised it hadn't closed down years ago.
Other people questioned whether Facebook would ever endure the same fate.
poll loading
