About the London Philharmonic Orchestra
Home About us London Philharmonic Orchestra
London Philharmonic Orchestra
The London Philharmonic Orchestra is one of the world's finest symphony orchestras, balancing a long and distinguished history with a reputation as one of the UK's most adventurous and forward-looking orchestras.
As well as giving classical concerts and opera performances in the UK and internationally, we also record film and video game soundtracks, have our own record label, and reach thousands of people every year through activities for schools and our local communities.
The Orchestra was founded by Sir Thomas Beecham in 1932, and since then has been headed by many of the great names in the conducting world, including Sir Adrian Boult, Bernard Haitink, Sir Georg Solti, Klaus Tennstedt and Kurt Masur. The Orchestra's current Principal Conductor is Vladimir Jurowski , appointed in 2007.  Andrés Orozco-Estrada became our Principal Guest Conductor in September 2015. Magnus Lindberg is the Orchestra’s current Composer in Residence.
'The London Philharmonic Orchestra is looking the most adventurous of London’s orchestras.'
Financial Times, Mar 2015
Where we perform
The London Philharmonic Orchestra has been performing at Southbank Centre's Royal Festival Hall in London since it opened in 1951, becoming Resident Orchestra there in 1992. We also have flourishing residencies in Brighton and Eastbourne , and in summer we play for Glyndebourne Festival Opera where we have been Resident Symphony Orchestra since 1964. Touring abroad forms a major part of the Orchestra's schedule: highlights of the 2016/17 season include visits to New York, Germany, Hungary, Spain, France, Belgium, The Netherlands and Switzerland.
'Exceptional playing from the London Philharmonic Orchestra.'
The Times, July 2015
Recordings and film
Having long been embraced by the recording, broadcast and film industries, the London Philharmonic Orchestra broadcasts regularly on TV and radio. We also work with the Hollywood and UK film industries, and have been recording soundtracks for over half a century. Big headliners include The Lord of the Rings trilogy, Maurice Jarre's Lawrence of Arabia, gems like East is East and most recently Thor: The Dark World and Iron Man 3.
In 2005 we established our own record label , which now numbers over 90 releases. Recent releases include The Genius of Film Music: Hollywood Blockbusters 1960s to 1980s , as well as archive recordings of Tennstedt conducting Beethoven's Symphonies Nos. 5 and 6 . Other projects have included a recording of James Horner's Collage: A Concerto for Four Horns – one of the very last commissions, written for members of the LPO's horn section, by the film composer just before his tragic early death in 2015.
Get involved
'Jurowski …  has established sufficient rapport with the orchestra to achieve the effects he desires while doing far less than most conductors do. The result was a noble and articulate reading of [Shostakovich's] great symphony, grand in scale and urgent in delivery.'
The Guardian, July 2015
The London Philharmonic Orchestra runs an energetic programme of activities for young people and local communities including our FUNharmonics family concerts and the BrightSparks schools' concerts . Over recent years, developments in technology and social networks have made it possible for us to reach even more people worldwide: all our recordings are available to download from iTunes and, as well as a YouTube channel and regular podcasts , we have a lively presence on Facebook ,  Twitter  and Instagram .
Please do not reproduce this biography. For an up-to-date printable biography, please visit our Press and marketing resources  page.
