David Bowie's last release, Lazarus, was 'parting gift' for fans in carefully planned finale
David Bowie's last release, Lazarus, was 'parting gift' for fans in carefully planned finale
Watch | David Bowie's last release, Lazarus, was 'parting gift' for fans in carefully planned finale
00:31
Hannah Furness , Arts Correspondent, video courtesy David Bowie/ RCA Label Group UK
13 January 2016 • 7:00am
David Bowie 's final record was a carefully-orchestrated farewell to his fans, his producer has confirmed.
Lazarus, released on the Bowie's 69th birthday  just two days before his death , opens with the lyrics: "Look up here, I'm in Heaven!"
Was David Bowie's Blackstar named after a cancer lesion?
 
Its video, which will be viewed in a very different light by millions of fans today, features the musician in a hospital bed, and finishes with him retreating in to a dark closet.
Tony Visconti,  the producer who worked with  Bowie  to complete his final album, has released a statement saying it was deliberately created and timed as a "parting gift" for his fans.
Watch | How the internet paid tribute to David Bowie
01:29
In a statement on his Facebook page, he said: "He always did what he wanted to do. And he wanted to do it his way and he wanted to do it the best way.
"His death was no different from his life - a work of Art.
Watch | David Bowie fans gather for sing-along in Brixton
00:55
"He made Blackstar for us, his parting gift.
"I knew for a year this was the way it would be. I wasn't, however, prepared for it.
"He was an extraordinary man, full of love and life. He will always be with us.
"For now, it is appropriate to cry."
Visconti  has previously spoken of creating the album, which was recorded in just three sessions over the course of three months at the beginning of 2015.
It now appears the singer and those closest to him arranged its release at the end of his life, after 18 months of living with cancer.
Music videos for Blackstar and Lazarus both feature a skull motif, with lyrics that will now be read and re-read by fans.
The title of Lazarus refers to the biblical character who was raised from the dead four days after he died by Jesus.
The many faces of David Bowie
From Davy Jones to Ziggy Stardust, we take a look at Bowie through the ages
