Mystery Story | Britannica.com
Mystery Story
ages-old popular genre of tales dealing with the unknown as revealed through human or worldly dilemmas; it may be a narrative of horror and terror, a pseudoscientific fantasy, a crime-solving story, an...
Displaying Featured Mystery Story Articles
Edgar Allan Poe
American short-story writer, poet, critic, and editor who is famous for his cultivation of mystery and the macabre. His tale The Murders in the Rue Morgue (1841) initiated the modern detective story, and the atmosphere in his tales of horror is unrivaled in American fiction. His The Raven (1845) numbers among the best-known poems in the national literature....
H.P. Lovecraft
American author of fantastic and macabre short novels and stories, one of the 20th-century masters of the Gothic tale of terror. Lovecraft was interested in science from childhood, but lifelong poor health prevented him from attending college. He made his living as a ghostwriter and rewrite man and spent most of his life in seclusion and poverty. His...
Graham Greene
English novelist, short-story writer, playwright, and journalist whose novels treat life’s moral ambiguities in the context of contemporary political settings. His father was the headmaster of Berkhamsted School, which Greene attended for some years. After running away from school, he was sent to London to a psychoanalyst in whose house he lived while...
The Hound of the Baskervilles
one of the best known of the Sherlock Holmes novels, written by Arthur Conan Doyle in 1901. The novel was serialized in Strand (1901–02) and was published in book form in 1902. Based on a local legend of a spectral hound that haunted Dartmoor in Devonshire, Eng., the story is set in the moors at Baskerville Hall and the nearby Grimpen Mire, and the...
Bram Stoker
Irish writer best known as the author of the Gothic horror tale Dracula. Although an invalid in early childhood—he could not stand or walk until he was seven—Stoker outgrew his weakness to become an outstanding athlete and football (soccer) player at Trinity College (1864–70) in Dublin, where he earned a degree in mathematics. After 10 years in the...
Enid Blyton
prolific and highly popular British author of stories, poems, plays, and educational books for children. Blyton, the daughter of a businessman, abandoned her early studies in music to train as a schoolteacher at the Ipswich High School (1916–18). Her first publication was a poem that appeared in a children’s magazine when she was only 14, and in 1917...
Ruth Rendell
British writer of mystery novels, psychological crime novels, and short stories who was perhaps best known for her novels featuring Chief Inspector Reginald Wexford. Rendell initially worked as a reporter and copy editor for West Essex newspapers. Her first novel, From Doon with Death (1964), introduced Wexford, the clever chief inspector of a town...
P.D. James
British mystery novelist best known for her fictional detective Adam Dalgliesh of Scotland Yard. The daughter of a middle-grade civil servant, James grew up in the university town of Cambridge. Her formal education, however, ended at age 16 because of lack of funds, and she was thereafter self-educated. In 1941 she married Ernest C.B. White, a medical...
The Maltese Falcon
mystery novel by Dashiell Hammett, generally considered his finest work. It originally appeared as a serial in Black Mask magazine in 1929 and was published in book form the next year. The novel’s sustained tension is created by vivid scenes and by the pace and spareness of the author’s style. The other major attraction of The Maltese Falcon is its...
Dick Francis
British jockey and mystery writer known for his realistic plots centred on the sport of horse racing. The son of a jockey, Francis took up steeplechase riding in 1946, turning professional in 1948. In 1957 he had an accident that cut short his riding career. That same year he published The Sport of Queens: The Autobiography of Dick Francis, and until...
Algernon Henry Blackwood
British writer of tales of mystery and the supernatural. After farming in Canada, operating a hotel, mining in the Alaskan goldfields, and working as a newspaper reporter in New York City, experiences that he recalled in Episodes Before Thirty (1923), Blackwood returned to England in 1899. Seven years later he published his first book of short stories,...
Walter Mosley
American author of mystery stories noted for their realistic portrayals of segregated inner-city life. Mosley attended Goddard College and Johnson State College, and he became a computer programmer before publishing his first novel, Devil in a Blue Dress (1990; film 1995). Set in 1948, the novel introduces Ezekiel (“Easy”) Rawlins, an unwilling amateur...
Scott Turow
American lawyer and best-selling novelist, the creator of a genre of crime and suspense novels dealing with law and the legal profession. Turow received a Juris Doctor (J.D.) degree in 1978 from Harvard University. While there he published a nonfiction work, One L: What They Really Teach You at Harvard Law School (1977), that is considered a classic...
Auguste, comte de Villiers de L’Isle-Adam
French poet, dramatist, and short-story writer whose work reflects a revolt against naturalism and a combination of Romantic idealism and cruel sensuality. His hatred of the mediocrity of a materialistic age and his compelling personality made a considerable impression on later writers. Villiers, who was the descendant of an aristocratic family, lived...
Andrew Greeley
American Roman Catholic priest, sociologist, educator, commentator, and prolific author who devoted more than 50 years to addressing the teachings of the Catholic faith through nonfiction works and newspaper articles, as well as television and radio broadcasts. He was also a popular novelist, publishing more than 50 best-selling novels. After receiving...
Mary Roberts Rinehart
American novelist and playwright best known for her mystery stories. Mary Roberts graduated from the Pittsburgh Training School for Nurses in 1896. That same year she married physician Stanley M. Rinehart. She and her husband started a family, and she took up writing in 1903 as a result of difficulties created by financial losses. Her first story appeared...
The Name of the Rose
novel by Umberto Eco, published in Italian as Il nome della rosa in 1980. Although the work stands on its own as a murder mystery, it is more accurately seen as a questioning of the meaning of “truth” from theological, philosophical, scholarly, and historical perspectives. The story centres on William of Baskerville (Guglielmo da Baskerville), a 50-year-old...
Shirley Jackson
American novelist and short-story writer best known for her story The Lottery (1948). Jackson graduated from Syracuse University in 1940 and married the American literary critic Stanley Edgar Hyman. They settled in North Bennington in 1945. Life Among the Savages (1953) and Raising Demons (1957) are witty and humorous fictionalized memoirs about their...
The Murders in the Rue Morgue
short story by Edgar Allan Poe, first published in Graham’s magazine in 1841. It is considered one of the first detective stories. The story opens with the discovery of the violent murder of an old woman and her daughter. No grisly detail is spared in the description of the crime scene as it is discovered by neighbours responding to the women’s screams....
Mary Higgins Clark
American mystery and suspense writer who, for more than four decades, was a fixture on best-seller lists. Higgins began writing poetry at the age of six. She also kept diaries throughout her life and credited her entries as the inspiration for some of her story ideas. Challenges in her early life—notably the death of her father, which left her middle-aged...
Janet Evanovich
American novelist known for her mystery series featuring hapless smart-mouthed New Jersey bounty hunter Stephanie Plum. Schneider was raised in a working-class family in South River, New Jersey. She studied painting at Rutgers University’s Douglass College, graduating with a bachelor’s degree in 1965. Having married mathematician Peter Evanovich the...
Elizabeth George
American novelist who created the popular Inspector Lynley mystery series. George was a prolific writer from childhood. She studied at Foothill Community College (now Foothill College) in Los Altos Hills, California, and at the University of California, Riverside, receiving a B.A. from the latter institution in 1970. She earned an M.S. in counseling...
John D. MacDonald
American fiction writer whose mystery and science-fiction works were published in more than 70 books. He is best remembered for his series of 21 crime novels featuring private investigator Travis McGee. After MacDonald graduated from Syracuse (New York) University (B.S., 1938) and Harvard Graduate School of Business (M.B.A., 1939), he served in World...
Sheridan Le Fanu
Irish writer of ghost stories and mystery novels, celebrated for his ability to evoke the ominous atmosphere of a haunted house. Le Fanu belonged to an old Dublin Huguenot family and was related on his mother’s side to Richard Brinsley Sheridan. Educated at Trinity College, Dublin, he became a lawyer in 1839 but soon abandoned law for journalism. The...
Bulldog Drummond
fictional character, the English hero of a popular series of English mystery novels (from 1920) by Sapper. Drummond, a two-fisted man of action, made his first appearance in a short story published in The Strand Magazine. He next appeared in the novel Bull-dog Drummond: The Adventures of a Demobilized Officer Who Found Peace Dull. (The author later...
Gaston Leroux
French novelist, best known for his Le Fantôme de l’opéra (1910; The Phantom of the Opera), which later became famous in various film and stage renditions. After leaving school, Leroux worked as a clerk in a law office and, in his free time, began writing essays and short stories. By 1890 he had become a full-time journalist, and from 1894 to 1906...
Ross Macdonald
American mystery writer who is credited with elevating the detective novel to the level of literature with his compactly written tales of murder and despair. Though born in California, Millar spent almost all his youth in Canada. He studied at Kitchener-Waterloo Collegiate Institute (near Toronto), the University of Western Ontario (B.A., 1938), and...
dime novel
a type of inexpensive, usually paperback, melodramatic novel of adventure popular in the United States roughly between 1860 and 1915; it often featured a western theme. One of the best-known authors of such works was E.Z.C. Judson, whose stories, some based on his own adventures, were written under the pseudonym Ned Buntline. The dime novels were eventually...
Ellis Peters
English novelist especially noted for two series of mysteries: one featuring medieval monastics in Britain and the other featuring a modern family. Peters worked as a pharmacist’s assistant during the 1930s and served in the Women’s Royal Navy Service from 1940 to 1945. Beginning in the mid-1930s she wrote historical fiction and crime novels, using...
Earl Derr Biggers
American novelist and journalist best remembered for the popular literary creation Charlie Chan. A wise Chinese-American detective on the Honolulu police force, Charlie Chan is the protagonist of a series of mystery detective novels that spawned popular feature films, radio dramas, and comic strips. Biggers attended Harvard University (B.A., 1907)...
