Buying Guide: How to Choose a Les Paul Guitar | The HUB
Thursday, 21 April 2016 14:29
.
Tweet
Finding the Gibson or Epiphone LP That’s Right for You and Your Budget
First, we’ll put the Les Paul in its historical context, then we’ll walk you through the many models available today. Use this guide to pinpoint the Les Paul that matches up with your music, your style, and your budget.
Table of Contents
The Les Paul Legacy—A Brief History
Epiphone Les Paul Series
Gibson USA Les Paul Series
2016 Les Pauls: Getting Back to Basics
Gibson Custom Shop Les Paul Models
Why Buy Your LP from Musician's Friend?
Need More Help?
About Our Private Reserve Collection
Glossary of Les Paul Terms
The Les Paul Legacy—A Brief History
The guitar that bears Les Paul’s name is among the most iconic instruments that have helped shape the sound of popular music. Since its introduction in 1952, the LP’s rich, thick, midrange-focused tone, coupled with a prodigious ability to sustain notes has had a huge impact on the sound of rock, blues, metal, and those genre’s modern offshoots.
Though there’s some controversy about exactly who contributed what elements, it’s clear that the LP was the result of a fateful collaboration between Gibson president Ted McCarty and Les Paul, the brilliant country and jazz guitarist and compulsive inventor and tinkerer. The trajectory of Gibson’s product line and Paul’s search for an electric guitar with more sustain and less feedback made that collaboration more or less inevitable.
First Came The Clunker
Les Paul had struggled for years with the feedback generated by electric hollowbody guitars when their volume was cranked up. In the early 1940s he bought an Epiphone Broadway hollowbody and retrofitted it with his own hand-wound pickups and a rectangular steel bar body brace. Though “The Clunker,” as Paul nicknamed it, partially overcame feedback, it wasn’t until he began experimenting with solidbody designs that feedback was fully tamed.
A tireless innovator, Les Paul was also a consummate guitar collector, constantly seeking new instruments to help realize his formidable jazz, country, and pop guitar chops. Photo courtesy of Gibson Guitar Corp.
Then Came The Log
His solidbody prototype called “The Log” had a body made from a solid chunk of pine that was just a bit wider than the neck and fretboard, and a little deeper than a standard hollowbody guitar. Paul attached two wooden wings on either side of the slab giving The Log roughly the appearance of a conventional archtop guitar. Unlovely to look at, it delivered on Paul’s aim to get feedback under control. Around 1946, he took his design to Gibson, but the company didn’t bite.
“The Log” wasn’t pretty to look at, but Les Paul’s prototype led the way to the guitar that bears his name to this day.
And Finally, the Les Paul was Born
It took several years and the introduction of a highly successful solidbody electric guitar by a certain California guitar company to bring Gibson around. The result was the Les Paul introduced in 1952. Unlike the upstart from the West Coast with it’s flashy, modernistic styling, slab body, bolt-on neck, and twangy tone, Gibson focused on building a solidbody instrument that retained the look of its carved-top hollowbody guitars, sharing their set-neck construction and trapeze tailpiece.
The Les Paul would eventually be offered in four models during the ‘50s and early ‘60s—the Custom, Standard, Special, and Junior. The LP took the guitar world by storm. Its solid mahogany body with a thin maple cap solved the age-old problem of feedback while producing remarkable sustain, and it’s ornate Florentine cutaway facilitated high-note soloing. Initially equipped with dual P-90 single-coil pickups, the introduction of Gibson’s PAF (Patent Applied For) humbucking pickup eliminated the hum that plagued electric guitars with single-coil pickups while delivering the fat, thick tone that has become a sonic hallmark of the Les Paul.
Paul continued to hold down a regular Monday night gig at New York’s Iridium Jazz Club well into his 80s despite painful arthritis in his hands.Photo courtesy of Gibson Guitar Corp.
In 1957 the Les Paul Custom came to market with its dual PAFs. A three-pickup version followed. Beginning in the early 1970s, Gibson has released dozens of variations of the LP, and the guitar has only grown in stature. Oddly though, in the early 1960s the Les Paul fell out of favor due to issues of weight and cost as well as a perception that it was a bit old-fashioned. But starting in the mid-’60s, British artists such as Keith Richards, Eric Clapton, Peter Green, and Jimmy Page, who all loved its thick, rock- and blues-friendly tone, rekindled interest in the LP. This resulted in the 1968 resumption of LP production.
Everybody Loves the LP
The list of artists who have wielded Les Pauls is legion. As noted above, it was British blues rockers like Clapton who led the way to the LP’s resurgence. They had been listening to LP-brandishing guitarists such as Texas bluesman Freddie King and his rollicking instrumental “Hideaway,” and to Howlin’ Wolf axman Hubert Sumlin’s stinging riffs on “Smokestack Lightning.” And they wanted some of that sound too!
On this side of the Atlantic it was Michael Bloomfield who helped cement the LP’s position as the go-to electric among heavy rock and blues players. The phenomenally talented Chicago native first owned a 1954 Les Paul goldtop, later trading up for the ‘59 LP Standard with which he’s most closely associated. The fat yet clean sound of Bloomfield’s LP was an urgent driving force in the Paul Butterfield Blues Band—for a time Dylan’s electric backup band that caused a ruckus at the Newport Folk Festival. In 2009 Gibson’s Custom Shop, recognizing Bloomfield’s contribution to LP lore, produced a painstaking limited-edition reproduction of his axe, replete with battle scars and Bloomfield’s mods.
A list of the other signature and tribute Les Pauls that Gibson has built invoke some of the most stellar names in modern music. They include Jimmy Page, Slash, Joe Perry, Ace Frehley, Marc Bolan, Jeff Beck, Pete Townshend, Billie Joe Armstrong, and dozens more. As we explore the many Les Paul models available today, we’ll touch on some of these special editions.
In this ‘50s-era shot, Les Paul wields a tremolo-equipped version of the guitar that likely will be his most durable legacy. Photo courtesy of Gibson Guitar Corp.
Epiphone Les Paul Series
The connection between inventor-musician Les Paul and Epiphone dates back to the late 1930s. In fact, Paul’s “The Log” was built during after-hours tinkering sessions in Epiphone’s New York plant, and the musician was a frequent consultant on designs, offering the insights of both a seasoned performer and audio innovator.
In 1957 Gibson acquired Epiphone, a long-standing rival in the market for hollowbody electric guitars. After the buyout, Epiphone instruments were built in Gibson’s factories and shared many of the same woods and components used in Gibson’s product line. Many Epiphone guitars were essentially identical to their Gibson counterparts.
Beginning in the 1970s, most Epiphone instruments were built in Japan and later in Korea. Continuing today, Epiphone guitars are built in Asian plants to Gibson’s exacting specifications. Having less hand work and less costly woods, hardware, and finishes than their U.S.-made counterparts, Epiphone versions of Gibson models offer excellent value for budget-conscious guitarists.
Let’s look at the lineup of Epiphone Les Paul series and models:
Epiphone Les Paul Standard Series
The Epiphone Les Paul Standard series extends the LP legacy with a number of models loaded with essential Paul features, but at a fraction of the cost of a Gibson. For instance, the Standard Plain Top features a mahogany body with a maple veneer top, a set mahogany neck, and a pair of Alnico Classic humbuckers, for plenty of rich, warm tones with tons of sustain.
There’s also a Standard Plus Top Pro model with a breathtaking flamed maple carved top and dual ProBucker pickups that offers amazing bang for the buck.
The Epiphone Les Paul Standard Plain Top delivers classic, thick humbucker tone at a bargain price.
 
Shop Musician’s Friend’s full selection of Epiphone Les Paul Standard models.
Epiphone Les Paul Traditional Pro
This LP is all about superb tonal versatility. The Les Paul Traditional Pro uses Epiphone's 4-wire, nickel/silver base humbuckers with newly tooled, USA-style bobbins. The Alnico Classic Pro humbucker with zebra coils in the neck is uniquely paired with a ProBucker-3. Both volume controls feature push/pull potentiometers allowing you to coil-split each pickup for single-coil sounds. Using the 3-way toggle, you get six unique sounds.
The Epi LP Traditional Pro has a unique pup configuration with coil-splitting for boundless tonal flexibility.
Epiphone Les Paul Custom Series
The original Gibson LP Custom introduced in 1954 was nicknamed “The Black Beauty” for its striking monochrome cosmetics. Its other moniker, “The Fretless Wonder,” referred to its low frets and slinky action. Dispensing with the maple cap of the original Paul, it had a carved mahogany top and was equipped with the newly introduced Tune-O-Matic bridge and sported more elaborate inlays and binding. Later versions would be produced with two or three PAF humbuckers—the latter configuration with a Bigsby vibrato tailpiece was Jimmy Page’s go-to session guitar.
Epiphone continues to uphold the Custom’s legacy offering affordable models in various configurations as well as some very cool signature models. The Zakk Wylde LP Custom is a great case in point. A pair of EMG active pickups deliver high-gain sonics and Wylde’s bulls-eye cosmetics serve up the visual attitude to match.
EMG-81/85 active pups on the Zakk Wylde LP Custom dish out the high-gain dementia needed to drive Ozzy’s band.
Check out the complete collection of Epiphone Les Paul Custom models .
Epiphone Les Paul Tribute Plus
The Tribute Plus commemorates the long-standing friendship between Les Paul and Epiphone’s owner, Epi Stathopoulos. Incorporating time-tested LP virtues with a pair of Gibson USA ‘57 Classic humbuckers, it has push pull tone pots for series/parallel switching. Premium hardware and electronics plus an included hard case make the Tribute a phenomenal value.
Memorializing Les Paul’s friendship with Epiphone’s founder, push-pull tone pots make the Tribute Plus a versatile tone machine.
Epiphone Les Paul Ultra III
Beneath its traditional profile and ProBucker pickups, the Ultra-III is armed with digital-age capabilities that its namesake would surely have relished. A NanoMag pickup embedded in the fretboard creates shimmering acoustic guitar tones that can be combined with the humbuckers. Output options include stereo and USB connections—the latter giving you access to free GuitarRig LE software for limitless creativity and fun. A full-function chromatic tuner built into the bridge pickup ring also keeps you posted on which pups are activated. This is definitely not your daddy’s Les Paul!
You can do astonishing things with the Ultra III’s NanoMag pickup and USB port.
 
Epiphone Prophecy Les Paul Custom Plus EX/GX
Both versions—the EX and GX—have a sweet-looking quilted maple veneer top and a super-sleek SpeedTaper neck for fleet fretting. They part company where electronics are concerned however. The EX is designed for high-gain players looking for the extreme output of EMG 81/185 active pickups. The GX features Gibson USA's powerful 490R/498T humbucker combination with push/pull coil-tapping for each pickup.
Choose the pickups that match your music with either an EX- or GX-configured LP Custom Plus from Epiphone .
 
Epiphone Les Paul Studio
When Gibson debuted the original LP Studio in 1983, cosmetics were downplayed in favor of sonic performance and shoulder-friendly weight reduction. The same is true with its Epiphone counterpart. Dual open-coil Alnico Classic pickups and a LockTone Tune-O-Matic bridge deliver classic Paul sound and performance. Currently, Epi offers Studio versions with dot-inlaid fingerboards as well as an all-black Goth version with dark cosmetics plus a kill switch for big transitions.
Stripped down and ready for action, the Epi LP Studio has all the Paul essentials at a pared-down price.
Shop all Epiphone Les Paul Studio models.
Epiphone Les Paul 100
Eminently affordable, the LP 100 delivers the Paul experience at a super-accessible price. Its bolt-on neck will take a beating, and a pair of open-coil humbuckers serve up the trademark LP sound. The Tune-O-Matic bridge makes for easy setup and the chrome hardware is super durable. The 100 is a great way for newbie guitarists with more enthusiasm than cash to get started on an an LP.
The gently priced Epiphone Les Paul 100 makes a solid starter axe.
Epiphone Les Paul Special II Series
Recognizing that new guitarists often are cramped by tight budgets, Epiphone builds the Special II series to provide all the satisfying tone and playability of more costly LPs. Available as of this writing in three versions, the Special II lineup includes a Plus Top limited edition with flamed maple veneer top. The GT version sports a worn black finish and a V-Trem tailpiece for whammying fun. All versions have an easily adjusted bolt-on neck with a comfortable slim-taper profile and open-coil humbuckers for genuine Paul sound.
With its flamed maple veneer the Special II Plus Top’s looks far exceed its easy price.
Shop all Epiphone Les Paul Special II models.
Epiphone Les Paul Performance Packs
Epiphone has the new guitarist in mind with its Les Paul Performance Packs . They come complete with everything you need to start jamming right out of the box, and are an awesome value. Take the Epiphone Slash “AFD” Les Paul Guitar Outfit. You get a dual-humbucker LP Special-II Guitar, a sweet little 2-channel 15-watt Slash Snakepit amp, plus all the extras like a gig bag, strap, cable, picks and access to online eMedia guitar lessons.
With the Slash “AFD” Les Paul Guitar Outfit you get the works—everything needed to start learning guitar.
 
The Epiphone Slash “AFD” Performance Pack is an amazingly sweet deal for the developing hard-rock/metal/blues player.
Gibson USA Les Pauls
Built in Gibson’s Nashville facility, USA Les Pauls continue to maintain their flagship status well into their sixth decade of production. The meticulous attention to detail, premium-quality woods, electronics, hardware, lavish finishes, and extensive handwork that made the LP an icon of American craftsmanship persist to this day.
We want you to be pleased with your Les Paul purchase, and offer a 100% satisfaction guarantee and generous return policy so you can order your new guitar with total confidence.
After reading this guide, if you’re still not sure which Gibson or Epiphone LP is right for you, we invite you to call one of our friendly and knowledgeable Gear Heads at (800) 449-9128.
Many Les Paul models are offered through the Private Reserve Guitars collection , staffed by our team of highly experienced guitar specialists. Call (866) 926-1623 for a personal consultation, in-hand description of specific models, detailed photos, or to set up a Skype audition session of any instruments you’d like to explore further.
2016 Les Pauls: Getting Back to Basics
In creating its 2016 lineup, Gibson has returned to those design essentials that made the LP the icon it is while also offering performance-friendly options for players looking for modern tweaks. This best-of-both-worlds approach should satisfy both purists who revere original LP designs as well as their performance-driven brethren. Gibson also announced lower prices in 2016 relative to earlier model years. From an aesthetic standpoint, the 2016 collection is breathtaking—all translucent finishes feature figured tops. Some 2016 Les Pauls are available in two configurations that we’ll look at next.
Understanding the New "T" versus "HP" Configurations
“T” configuration Les Paul Standard Les Pauls are built for traditionalist who like their LPs the way their daddies did. Just about everything conforms to original LP specs: vintage-style tuners, original neck width and an historically shaped heel. “HP” configured LPs come with modern G FORCE tuners for improved performance, a new, solo-friendly neck width, redesigned heel for easier fretboard access, and perhaps most critically, a new dip switch giving you access to more than 150 signal-routing options.
Les Paul Standard
As the standard bearer for the entire collection of LPs, the Les Paul Standard contains all the traditional ingredients that contribute to its trademark sound. These include a weight-relieved mahogany body with hand-carved maple top, bound mahogany neck and rosewood fingerboard. As noted above, you now can get your LP Standard in either the traditional T configuration or the tweaked HP version built for the demands of modern performers.
The 2016 LP Standard in its “T” configuration signals a return to original LP values and specs.
 
Musician's Friend has a huge selection of Les Paul Standard guitars from Gibson and Epiphone.
Les Paul Studio
Originally intended as a no-frills option for the working pro guitarist back in 1982—Gibson continues that business-like approach today. You get a weight-relived modern body that’s shoulder-friendly during long sets, a maple top, one-piece mahogany neck, rosewood fingerboard and 490R/498T pups on Studio models or Burstbucker Po pickups on the Studio Faded series .
The Les Paul Studio T delivers full-fledged traditional LP performance without the costly cosmetic frills.
 
Check out the enormous collection of Les Paul Studio guitars from Gibson and Epiphone
Les Paul Custom
Introduced in 1954, the Les Paul Custom was (and still is) all about class. Les Paul told Gibson he wanted an axe that looked like it belonged in the hands of tuxedo-clad musician—the norm at the time. Gibson complied with what Paul would call the “Black Beauty”. With lavish gold pickups full binding and the classic split-diamond headstock inlay, the Custom exuded polish. The first LP equipped with the rock-solid Tune-o-matic bridge, in 1957 the Custom would also get Ted McCarty’s powerful, new PAF humbuckers. Today you can get a Custom with dozens of possible cosmetic and electronic options.
Shop the complete selection of Gibson and Epiphone Les Paul Custom Guitars at Musician's Friend.
Les Paul Traditional
In many respects similar to the LP Standard, the Les Paul Traditional employs the same tonewood recipe. But unlike its stablemate, the Traditional substitutes a neck humbucker with a traditional wind enhanced clarity and a slightly overwound bridge pickup that evokes the tone of the original PAF. With its weight-relived mahogany body and traditional neck carve, this is a great pick for the traditionalist who needs an axe to count on for classic sounds. Premium finish options up the dazzle factor on figured tops.
A sweet combo of classic LP tone with tweaked performance and comfort features, the 2016 Traditional Les Paul comes in a range of drop-dead gorgeous finishes.
 
Explore the full collection of Gibson Les Paul Traditional models.
Les Paul Tribute
The Les Paul Tribute collection is aimed squarely at guitarists who lust after genuine Gibson LP tone and performance but lack the budget for more deluxe appointments. Covering a range of eras, looks and price points, Tribute models will appeal to the player who loves vintage LP performance and sound but can’t handle the price. You’ll find a range of finish and electronics options to suit just about anyone.
For the guitarist on a budget who loves the look and feel of 1950s-era LPs, the 2016 Les Paul ‘50s Tribute fits the bill nicely.
 
Find the Les Paul Tribute from Gibson or Epiphone that matches your budget and musical needs.
Les Paul True Historic
Built in Gibson’s Custom Shop, instruments in the Gibson True Historic Les Paul collection reflect an obsessive attention to detail in recreating some of the most revered LPs of all time. Necks and tops are double-carved and hand-sanded, then wet-sanded for a finish that looks miles deep. Custom Bucker pickups replicate that sought-after PAF tonal complexity. Original plastic parts and finishes have received microscopic analysis in order to precisely replicate them. These instruments (and all Gibson Custom Shop guitars) are offered through Musician’s Friend Private Reserve where you’ll find an unparalleled selection of premium Les Pauls.
The 2015 True Historic 1960 Les Paul Reissue offers a meticulous recreation of the last of the original sunbursts at a fraction of a mint-condition original’s price.
 
 
Check out the unrivaled selection of Gibson Les Paul True Historic Series guitars at Musician’s Friend Private Reserve.
Les Paul (Standard Historic) Historic Reissue
When Gibson inaugurated the Custom Shop in 1996, the LP was pivotal in setting a high bar. Gibson luthiers pored over vintage Pauls in a quest to discover what materials and construction techniques produced exceptional LPs. Sometimes referred to as Standard Historic instruments, their superb workmanship and woods set them apart. Historic Reissue Les Pauls range from one-off exact recreations of specific instruments that receive convincing aging treatments to pristine replications of originals worth a fortune. In some cases our team has collaborated with Gibson Custom in selecting specific bookmatched maple sets and the finishes that best reveal its gorgeous figuring. Keep in mind that Custom Shop instruments come and go; some instruments shown here may have been sold by the time you read this.
See the entire current selection of Historic Reissue Les Pauls at Private Reserve.
Les Paul Collector's Choice
Collectors Choice series Les Pauls are meticulously created in the Gibson Custom Shop using the beloved instruments of players and collectors both famous and not so famous as templates for newly created investment-grade guitars. What ties the series together is a quest to find and reproduce some of the choicest LPs ever made. Many come from the most revered period in LP production—1958 through the early ’60. Collector’s Choice models have also been built to mirror instruments owned by players such as Ronnie Montrose and Brad Whitford.
Historically correct in every detail, the was limited to a worldwide run of just 300 guitars, Collector's Choice #24, Charles Daughtry 1959 Les Paul offers a meticulous recreation of the last of the original sunbursts at a fraction of a mint-condition original’s price.
 
