Pregnant Lisa Scott-Lee does a Demi Moore and poses naked | Daily Mail Online
Pregnant Lisa Scott-Lee does a Demi Moore and poses naked
comments
Ex-Steps singer Lisa Scott-Lee looks fantastic as she poses naked to show off her baby bump.
The singer, 33, recreates Demi Moore's famous Vanity Fair pose, as she prepares for the birth of her second child next month. 
Actress Demi Moore made the famous pose for the August 1991 cover of Vanity Fair when she was seven months pregnant.
Capturing a classic pose: Lisa Scott-Lee poses naked in the same style that Demi Moore did for Vanity Fair
The controversial cover featuring Demi Moore which inspired Lisa's photoshoot
Famed photographer Annie Leibovitz shot the picture during Demi's pregnancy with daughter Scout LaRue.
It was hugely controversial as critics felt showing a pregnant woman as a sex symbol was wrong.
But Lisa, who is eight months pregnant, posed happily for this week's Closer magazine.
She explained: 'Being pregnant is such a natural thing, it's so liberating to show off my bump.
'I even feel sexy! I'll keep these photos to remind me of such a momentous time.'
The Dancing On Ice and CelebAir star Lisa is married to ex-Hear'Say singer Johnny Shentall, 30,  and they have an 18-month-old son Jaden.
The 5ft 4in Welsh singer normally weighs 7st 10lb, but said she has already put on a stone and a half during her pregnancy and said her 34B boobs have grown to a C cup.
Lisa Scott-Lee and her husband Johnny Shentall are expecting a brother or sister for 18-month-old Jaden
RELATED ARTICLES
Share
'It's like I've just had a boob job', she said.
'They keep getting bigger. When I breastfed Jaden they went up to a DD, so I'm hoping for that this time round.'
It seems that pregnancy is suiting her the second time around.
During her last pregnancy, Lisa put on more than two stone, and three months after giving birth, admitted the experience was 'a bit alien'.
‘Each day I was growing and growing and getting bigger and bigger – it did feel a bit alien,’ she said.
‘Gaining weight wasn’t the most important thing on my mind, obviously my little baby was, but I did think about it.
'I think most women have insecurities. If they say they don't, they're lying.'
● Closer magazine is on sale today.
