Kina-paper monetary unit, the note, a denomination, modern money Papua New Guinea
of 452 860 sq. km
English, to the squanderer (state) and dialects
PG (PNG) 598
Monetary unit - a kina ( K )=100 toea.
In XIX century in territory of Papua token moneys in pounds sterling, and New Guinea - in the German marks addressed. Since September, 1st 1906. In Papua and since September, 12th 1914. In New Guinea the Australian token moneys became a lawful legal tender. These two parts of the country have been aggregated in the administrative relation by the Australian authorities in 1949
Since January, 1st 1976. A lawful legal tender are only token moneys in kinas. Issue of national token moneys by Bank of Papua New Guinea is begun in April 1975.; in September 1975. The country has found independence. Since January 1976. The Australian notes and coins have lost lawful payment force.
In circulation there are denominations of denomination of 2, 5, 10, 20, 50 and 100 kinas. In circulation   Are both paper denominations, and notes on a polymeric basis, and also anniversary tickets. For example,   Series of denominations in honour of the 25 anniversary of independence, approach of new century, and also the 25 anniversary are manufactured   The state currency.
On face side of the plastic note in nominal value of 2 kinas the country symbol - a paradise bird is seated - and are possessed   The text " 25 PAPUA NEW GUINEA SILVER JUBILEE" and a transparent circle with the National bank emblem.   On the back craft items are represented. The watermark and a protective thread are absent. Dominating   Colours - light green, olive and yellow.
On face side of a paper denomination of denomination in 5 kinas the paradise bird, and also an inscription are represented " 25 PAPUA NEW GUINEA SILVER JUBILEE". Ha a turn-over the plotting of a traditional mask and a necklace are seated.   As protection the denomination is supplied by a watermark in the form of the National bank emblem. On the left side of the note   There passes the metallized diving protective strip. Fundamental colours - violet, lilac and orange.
The biggest nominal value of a series - 100 kinas - has a polymeric basis and an interesting protection frame (along with   The transparent strip executed by a special paint, and transparent window) - the shadow plotting in a kind   Emblems of the Central Bank of Papua New Guinea.
It is updated 04.2012
