Highest waterfalls of the world
Start  > Waterfalls   of the world  > Highest waterfalls of the world
Highest waterfalls of the world
WATERFALLS WITH THE HEIGHT ABOVE 300 M
About page
In the list there are included waterfalls with the height above 300 meters. This list is compiled of several   sources but author has not gained confidence that this list is complete. Could it be true,   that Europe has such a big share of world's highest waterfalls? In South America is located the highest   waterfall of the world - but there are just few other waterfalls above 300 m?
1. Salto Angel, (Salto Churún Merú)
Country: Venezuela
Location: Canaima National park
River: Gauja (Rio Gauya), tributary of Rio Churún. The last in turn is tributary of Rio Caroni.   The name - Gauja - to the river has been given by Latvian Alejandro Laime , who was the first to reach this waterfall by land.   The other Gauja river is located in Latvia - in fact it is among the most beautiful rivers of Latvia.   Often there is made mistake by telling that this waterfall is on Rio Churún.
Height: 979 m
Other information: At the lower part the waterfall is 150 m wide. Europeans discovered the waterfall   in 1935. Waterfalls is named after James Angel - American adventurer, who had to make an emergency landing with his plane   nearby in 1937.
2. Tugela Falls
River: Tyssa - the flow has been decreased by hydropowerplant
Height: 647 m
10. Salto Kukenan, Cuquenan
Country: Venezuela, Guyana
Location: Cuquenan tepui (tepuis -   huge, wast plateaus in the south of Venezuela, in the north of Brasil and in   Guyana)
River: Rio Cuquenan, tributary of Rio Caroni
Height: 610 m
Links: To my mind this is very interesting homepage with comparatively qualitative   pictures.
11. Dudhsagar Falls
Location: Border of Karnataka and Goa states
River: Mandovi
Height: 600 m
Other information: There   are higher waterfalls in India. This is located in luch tropical jungle. The   waterfall is not vertical, it falls over the Deccan plateau. It is possible   that we hear about this   waterfall just because it is very popular tourism destination in Goa   state, which is easily accessible for Europeans.
Other information: Discovered   in 1994, the highest waterfall in Mexico.
19. Della Falls
Location: Brittish Columbia,   Vancouver Island, Strathcona Provincial Park
River: Drinkwater Creek
Height: 440 m
Other information: Three   cascades, the fall is nearly vertical. The highest waterfall in Canada.   The first white man - hunter Joe Drinkwater - saw   the waterfall in 1899, it is named after the wife of Drinkwater.   Water is fed by the glacier lake.
20. Gavarnie Falls (Grande Cascade)
Country: France
Location: Pyrenees, Lourdes,   Western Pyrenees National Park
River: Gave de Pau
Height: 423 m (425m, 442m ?)
Other information: In   Gavarnie circus there are 12 waterfalls falling from steep 400 - 500   m high cliffs - this waterfall is the highest. It has two cascades. Waterfall   is fed by the water of Glase   lake (Spain) and the melting snow. At the beginning of summer, when the   snow melts, both cascades merge into one.
Links: The picture is at the bottom   part of this page .
21. Konkoure Falls
Location: Northern part of the   country
River: Konkoure River
Height: 411 m
Other information: Konkoure   River has got many waterfalls, when running down from Fouta Djallon plateau.   The height of these waterfalls is from 24 till 411 metres. (
Encyclopædia Britannica
River: Krimmler, tributary of Salzach
Height: 380 m
Other information: The   highest waterfall in Austrian Alps. Three cascades, the most   impressive has 140 m height.
Links: Special homepage for   this waterfall. More informative is this page .
23. Takkakaw Falls
Location: Brittish Columbia,   Yoho National Park
River: Takkakaw Creek, Yoho River?
Height: 373 m
Other information: Earlier   this was considered to be the highest waterfall of Canada (503 m), but   the measurements of year 1985 “lovered” it. Consists of three nearly vertical cascades. Waterfalls are fed by Dali glacier   meltwater.
Links: Information   and pictures from http://home.earthlink.net/~geoffcon/falls/takakkaw.htm
24. Vetis Falls (Vettisfossen)
