TM-FORUM • View topic - [Xaseco] Quiz-plugin (finnish) v9.0 update 23.2.2010
[Xaseco] Quiz-plugin (finnish) v9.0 update 23.2.2010
 Post subject: [Xaseco] Quiz-plugin (finnish) v9.0 update 23.2.2010
Posted: 02 Jul 2009 22:42 
smooth traffic navigator
Joined: 02 Jul 2009 22:24
Posts: 213
Owned TM-games: TMUF
23.2.2010 - now version 9.0
Lots of improvements, but lacks function to read questions from file, but you can copypaste it from version 1.5, hopefully
* Admins
* Ingame help
* Admin can grant / remove points with single click
* Questions queue, users can ask questions and they are shown by the order what they were asked
* check for non-normal charracters on answer like ¨ ^ ´ `
etc etc..
http://koti.mbnet.fi/reaby/xaseco/
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Well, on one server we have a tradition of having a quiz run by a player. Today I had an idea to make actually a point calculating system for it. Apparently this script is so fresh that it isn't in use of any servers yet, but hopefully it finds its place on that server.
Update: The script without reading questions from file is now in use on the server.
how it works?
type /quiz and new question is asked from file.
how to ask questions outside of file?
/quiz_ask what color is a red car ? red
how to answer?
simply type answer to chat, and if you get it right you will be given a point.
other commands are /quiz_points and /quiz_reset
The script doesn't require local database, and scores are only stored temporarily. Quiz questions are placed on xaseco folder, where all xml files are, but it's named quiz_questions.txt, the format is same as asking custom question and 1 question/line. End of this posting is some sample questions.
Code:
/* plugin.quiz_en.php
English version of QuizBot 1.5 by Reaby
Many thanks for Assembler Maniac for Chatbot which this bot utilizes the main loop for getting chat-text from users.
How it works?
To ask manually question simply type /quiz_ask [question] ? [answer]
To ask question from file type /quiz
To reset points /quiz_reset
/quiz_ask which color has red car on ? red
answering normally by typing to chat.
*/
Aseco::addChatCommand('quiz_ask', 'Ask a question, right answer after questionmark');
Aseco::addChatCommand('quiz', 'Ask a question from file');
class quizbot
      // ignore text that comes from the server
      // also ignore anything that looks like it's a command
      if ( $command[0] == 0 || substr($command[2], 0, 1) == '/' )      // $command[0] is the player id, 0 = server
         {
         if ( strtolower($command[2]) == strtolower($this->rightAnswer) )
            {
         $message = "\$0b0 Right answer! \$fff".$this->rightAnswer;
          $this->Aseco->client->query('GetPlayerInfo', $command[1]);
         $info = $this->Aseco->client->getResponse();
         $nick = $info['NickName'];
         $this->points[$command[1]]['NickName'] = $nick;
         $this->points[$command[1]]['Points']++;
            $this->Aseco->client->query("ChatSendServerMessage", $message);
            $this->points();  // show points at successcull answer
      unset($this->rightAnswer);
    $this->Aseco->client->query("ChatSendServerMessage", $message);
    }
    $this->Aseco->client->query("ChatSendServerMessage", $message);
    }
   foreach ($this->points as $info) {
   $message .=$info['NickName'].": \$z\$s\$fff".$info['Points']." ";
   }
    $this->Aseco->client->query("ChatSendServerMessage", $message);
    }
$message = "Scores are now reset!";
$aseco->client->query('ChatSendServerMessage', $aseco->formatColors($message));
unset($quizbot->points);
And the sample questions file: quiz_questions.txt
Code:
Which world famous landmark is found on Mount Lee? Hollywood Sign
What is sake made from ? Rice
In George Orwell`s Animal Farm, what type of animals were Clover, Mollie and Boxer? Horses
What is the hardest natural substance? diamond
How many different scoring areas are there on a standard dart board (type only number)? 82
The pop groups Ace Of Base and The Cardigans both hail from which country? Sweden
What colour are the shorts that Bart Simpson normally wears? Blue
Which British female singer had a 2006 hit with `Rehab`? Amy Winehouse
In which country would you find the Mojave Desert? USA
Which Barbadian singer stayed ten weeks at number 1 with `Umbrella`? Rihanna
What is a more common name for the Aurora Borealis? Northern Lights
What does the information technology term RAM stand for? Random Access Memory
In cycling, what colour jersey is awarded to the leader in a stage race of the Tour de France? Yellow
By what name is the Sodium Chloride more commonly known? Salt
Which american state has a name that ends in three vowels? Hawaii
The does the chemical symbol Pb stand for? Lead
What is the correct term for the people commonly known as `Eskimos`? Inuit
What is the highest score a judge can award in figure skating (type only number)? 6
Who sung the theme tune for the film `Goldeneye`? Tina Turner
How many grooves are on one side of an LP record (type only number)? 1
Last edited by reaby on 23 Feb 2010 22:01, edited 5 times in total.
 Post subject: Re: Xaseco Quiz-plugin
Posted: 03 Jul 2009 07:28 
smooth traffic navigator
Joined: 16 May 2008 21:57
Posts: 204
Owned TM-games: TMNF, TMUF
Ok nice. I havent tried it yet but it would be great if u could have a bot that ask's a question every minute or something, and u can set so that you can play for coppers (Own choice) Hope u like those ideas
 Post subject: Re: Xaseco Quiz-plugin 1.0
Posted: 03 Jul 2009 11:28 
smooth traffic navigator
Joined: 02 Jul 2009 22:24
Posts: 213
I managed to fix this version with nickname support!
Here it is
Edit: removed the code and added new on first posting.
Last edited by reaby on 03 Jul 2009 21:19, edited 1 time in total.
 Post subject: Re: Xaseco Quiz-plugin
Posted: 03 Jul 2009 13:14 
swift roadking
Joined: 16 Feb 2007 02:40
Posts: 692
Location: Between DisneyLand and Paris
Owned TM-games: TMO/TMN/TMNF/TMU
 Post subject: Re: Xaseco Quiz-plugin
Posted: 04 Jul 2009 18:40 
speedy pilot
Joined: 27 May 2008 17:58
Posts: 313
Location: Scotland
Owned TM-games: All
Here is a copy of ours, it works 100% and has a fewmore questions than the default:
Code:
/* plugin.quiz_en.php
English version of QuizBot 1.5 by Reaby
Many thanks for Assembler Maniac for Chatbot which this bot utilizes the main loop for getting chat-text from users.
How it works?
To ask manually question simply type /quiz_ask [question] ? [answer]
To ask question from file type /quiz
To reset points /quiz_reset
/quiz_ask which color has red car on ? red
answering normally by typing to chat.
*/
Aseco::addChatCommand('quiz_ask', 'Ask a question, right answer after questionmark');
Aseco::addChatCommand('quiz', 'Ask a question from file');
class quizbot
      // ignore text that comes from the server
      // also ignore anything that looks like it's a command
      if ( $command[0] == 0 || substr($command[2], 0, 1) == '/' )      // $command[0] is the player id, 0 = server
         {
         if ( strtolower($command[2]) == strtolower($this->rightAnswer) )
            {
         $message = "\$0b0 Right answer! \$fff".$this->rightAnswer;
          $this->Aseco->client->query('GetPlayerInfo', $command[1]);
         $info = $this->Aseco->client->getResponse();
         $nick = $info['NickName'];
         $this->points[$command[1]]['NickName'] = $nick;
         $this->points[$command[1]]['Points']++;
            $this->Aseco->client->query("ChatSendServerMessage", $message);
            $this->points();  // show points at successcull answer
      unset($this->rightAnswer);
    $this->Aseco->client->query("ChatSendServerMessage", $message);
    }
    $this->Aseco->client->query("ChatSendServerMessage", $message);
    }
   foreach ($this->points as $info) {
   $message .=$info['NickName'].": \$z\$s\$fff".$info['Points']." ";
   }
    $this->Aseco->client->query("ChatSendServerMessage", $message);
    }
$message = "Scores are now reset!";
$aseco->client->query('ChatSendServerMessage', $aseco->formatColors($message));
unset($quizbot->points);
And here is the questions:
Code:
Which world famous landmark is found on Mount Lee? Hollywood Sign
What is sake made from ? Rice
In George Orwell`s Animal Farm, what type of animals were Clover, Mollie and Boxer? Horses
What is the hardest natural substance? diamond
How many different scoring areas are there on a standard dart board (type only number)? 82
The pop groups Ace Of Base and The Cardigans both hail from which country? Sweden
What colour are the shorts that Bart Simpson normally wears? Blue
Which British female singer had a 2006 hit with `Rehab`? Amy Winehouse
In which country would you find the Mojave Desert? USA
Which Barbadian singer stayed ten weeks at number 1 with `Umbrella`? Rihanna
What is a more common name for the Aurora Borealis? Northern Lights
What does the information technology term RAM stand for? Random Access Memory
In cycling, what colour jersey is awarded to the leader in a stage race of the Tour de France? Yellow
By what name is the Sodium Chloride more commonly known? Salt
Which american state has a name that ends in three vowels? Hawaii
The does the chemical symbol Pb stand for? Lead
What is the correct term for the people commonly known as `Eskimos`? Inuit
What is the highest score a judge can award in figure skating (type only number)? 6
Who sung the theme tune for the film `Goldeneye`? Tina Turner
How many grooves are on one side of an LP record (type only number)? 1
Who was the first ever man seen of Channel 4? Richard Whitely
What was Don Diego De La Vega's secret identity? Zorro
Who teamed up with Nancy Sinatra for the 1971 hit 'Did You Ever'? Lee Hazlewood
Who links Yazoo and Erasure? Vince Clarke
Who was Jimmy Somerville's partner in the Communards? Richard Coles
Who cover of an Elvis song gave the Pet Shop Boys a number one in 1987? Always on My Mind
Who joined Billy Preston on the 1979 hit 'With You I'm Born Again'? Syreeta
Which two singers joined forces in 1986 for 'On My Own'? Patti Lebelle and Michael McDonald
Which sixties duo could have been called Stewart and Clyde? Chad and Jeremy
Which band had a hit in 1986 with 'Sometimes'? Erasure
Which pair pleaded 'Don't Stay Awar Too Long'? In 1974? Peters and Lee
What was the title of the Pet Shop Boys second UK number one? It' a Sin
Which girl duo got to number five in the charts in 1984 with 'Since Yesterday'? Strawberry and Switchblade
What was Peter and Gordon's follow-up to 'A World Without Love'? Nobody I Know
With whom did Elton John release a live version of 'Don't Let The Sun Go Down On Me'? in 1991? George Michael
For whom was it 'Yesterday Once More' in 1973? The Carpenters
Which Everly Brothers classic was a hit for Bobbie Gentry and Glen Campbell in 1969? All I Have To Do Is Dream
Which two country artists got together for 'Islands In The Steam' in 1983? Kenny Rogers and Dolly Parton
Who has daughters called Fifi Trixibelle and Peaches? Bob Geldof
Which actor was reported last week of having been the target of an Al-Queada kidnap plot in 2001? Russell Crowe
What is Ozzy Osborne' real first name? John
Which actor played the 8th Doctor Who in a one-off TV Movie made by America in 1996? Paul McGann
Which comedy duo lived in Oil Drum Lane? Steptoe and Son
Which duo foiled master criminal Feathers McGraw? Wallace & Gromit
What is the name of the boy at the centre of the Michael Jackson abuse trial? Gavin Arvizo
In which year did Robbie Williams leave Take That? 1995
Who wrote The Sound of Music? Rodgers & Hammerstein
What is the small town in which called in which Clark Kent grew up? Smallville
Which very popular animated series has characters called Dizzy, Scoop and Muck? Bob The Builder
What film remake is Lord of the Rings director Peter Jackson currently working on? King Kong
In which year did the yellow puppet Flat Eric reach number 1 and Britney achieve her first UK #1? 1999
Which Nintendo arcade game first introduced the character of Mario? Donkey Kong
Which musical does "youll never walk alone" come from? Carousel
In 2003, which entertainer sparked interested with a publicity stunt of apparently cutting off his ear during a press conference? David Blaine
Charles Bronson who died in 2003 was best know for the film Death Wish. In which year was it released? 1974
In a 2003 list compiled by the US film industry (actors, dir, critics), who was voted best screen villain? Hannibal Lecter
Who directed the film Dune? A) David Lynch, b) Ridley Scott, c) David Fincher - answer A
How is Ilyena Lydia Mironoff better known? Hellen Mirren
Who, upon splitting with her partner said, "At least I can wear high heels now."? Nicole Kidman
Who replaced Rick Waller in the finals of the UK TV programme in 2002 "Pop Idol"? Darius Danesh
One half of a comedy due, by what name was Arthur Jefferson better known? Stan Laurel
Which dancer created the role of Mr Mistoffolees in the original stage production of Cats in May 1981? Wayne Sleep
What is the name of the cross eyed lion in "Daktari"? Clarence
Who directed the film Crash? David Kronenberg
Who said of Mick Jagger: I'm sure he'll find someone else to be unfaithful to soon.? Jerry Hall
Who wrote the first series of Black Adder? Richard Curtis and Rowan Atkinson
The song, Ain't Misbehavin' was written by which famous jazz musician? Fats Waller
In which BBC TV series did Jean Alexander play Auntie Wainwright? Last of the Summer Wine
Alison Hannigan plays which character in the TV series Buffy the Vampire Slayer? Willow
Who were the writers of the TV comedy series Father Ted? Graham Linehan & Arthur Matthews
Who wrote and composed the opera Oedipus Rex? Stravinsky
The Matrix reloaded took $93 mil in its opening US weekend, a record secondly only to which previous film? Spider-man
Which highly photographed mammal sleeps the least, about 20 minutes per day? Giraffe
Which 1939 film starring Gary Cooper was banned in France from 1939 till 1977 due to its depiction of the French Foreign Legion? Beau Geste
What are the four common colours on the flags of the following countries. Iraq, Syria, Kuwait and Afghanistan? Red, Green, White and Black
Which very well known Italian surname means metal worker or smith? Ferrari
Mahatma Gandhi. What does Mahatma mean? Great soul
The building of what cost the lives of over 27,500 workmen before it's completion in 1914: Clue: It was built by French and American workmen and the biggest killers included mudslides, malaria and yellow fever? The Panama Canal
The martyr and patron saint of Paris St Denis was buried on which famous hill? Montmartre
Which railway line, running from Damascus to Medina, was the target for T.E. Lawrence's raiding Arabs in World War I? The Hejaz Railway
Which son of a Coalminer shattered all attendance records in Las Vegas in 1969? Tom Jones
Which chess piece is known in French as a 'fou' - an idiot or madman? Bishop
The oldest of the five English horse racing classics, first run in 1776, is raced at Doncaster over 1 mile 6 furlongs and approximately 130 yards (127? 132?). Which is it? St Leger
In which country does one leu (plural lei) equal 100 boni? Romania
The local name is Hayastan - by what name do we know it? Armenia
The Gog Magog hills lie just outside what town? Cambridge
Which composer wrote The Water Music? Handel
What colour does acid turn Litmus paper? Red
What's the largest Scandinavian country? Sweden
What was Mickey Mouse's original name? Mortimer Mouse
Which metal do you get from bauxite? Aluminium
Which animal produces the biggest baby? Blue Whale
What was the name of the Benedictine monk who legend has it invented Champagne? Dom Perignon
In which Country is Auschwitz (Birkenau)? Poland
Who was Leonardo di Caprio's co-star in Titanic? Kate Winslett
What sort of creature is a bustard? A bird
What is calcium carbonate normally known as? Chalk
Who commanded the Allied forces, which invaded Europe on D-Day? Dwight Eisenhower
What word do we use to describe the Asexual reproduction of a genetic carbon copy of an animal or plant? Clone
Which Spaniard is known for his hallucinatory paintings? Salvadore Dali
In Basketball it’s called a Tip Off, in Football a Kick off what is it called in Ice Hockey? Face off
In the USA what name was given to a seller of illegal alcohol? Bootlegger
What word means gradually getting louder and louder? Crescendo
Which country voted to keep the Queen in 1999? Australia
Will Smith played the part of Steven Hiller in the film 'Independence Day'. What was his codename? Eagle
Constantino Rocca plays which sport? Golf
In mythology what was minerva the Goddess of? Wisdom
In the movies who plays the role of Harry Potter? Daniel Radcliffe
In the Hans Christian Andersen story, which little girl was found inside the petals of a flower? Thumbelina
Which is the only US state to begin with the letter 'P'? Pennsylvania
In 1996 what overtook Coca-Cola as being the most well known brand name in the world? McDonalds
What is God called by the Islamic or Muslim faith? Allah
Which spirit is the base for a Black Russian cocktail? Vodka
What is the capital of Venezuela? Caracus
The neutered male of which animal is called 'a Barrow'? Pig
In which film did Jim Carrey play the bank clerk Stanley Ipkiss? The Mask
If you were playing darts and got a 'Shanghai' score of 72 with 3 darts which number have you scored on? 12
Which is the largest Fresh water lake in the world? Superior
In motoring terms what does OHC stand for? Overhead Camshaft
What is the title of the lowest order of the British nobility? Baron/Baroness
What is the name of the process used for clarifying beer or wine? Fining
How many hearts does an octopus have? 3
Who is the Greek god of music? Apollo
How many countries are still members of the British Commonwealth? 53
In the TV comedy Dad's Army what is Captain Mainwaring's first name? George
Pershore, Victoria and Washington are types of which fruit? Plum
How many teeth does an elephant have? 4
Which US city hosted the 1985 Live Aid concert? Philadelphia
Haptic relates to which of the five senses? Touch
What type of animal is a Saki? Monkey
If a creature is edentulous what has it not got? Teeth
What were the eldest sons of the Kings of France called? Dauphin
What is a baby seal called? A pup
In the human body what is Varicella commonly known as? Chicken Pox
How many valves does a trumpet have? 3
Brock is a nickname for which animal? A Badger
What is the name of the RAF's aerobatics team? Red Arrows
Which footballer’s autobiography is titled The Good The Bad and the Bubbly? George Best
In which ocean are the Canary Islands? Atlantic
Which branch of Medicine is concerned with providing artificial limbs for the body? Prosthetics
What is a person who shoes horses called? Farrier
Which team was Liverpool playing in the 1985 European Cup Final when the Heysel stadium disaster happened, banning all English clubs from European Football for 6 years? Juventus
In which film did Patrick Swayze play Johnny Castle? Dirty Dancing
In Iraq, what are the 2 main Muslim sects? Sunni and Shiite
In the famous Nintendo games, what is the name of Mario's brother? Luigi
What is the antonym of the word synonym? Antonym
Which animal’s milk is used to make authentic Italian mozzarella cheese? Water buffalo
What is the US equivalent of the S.A.S.? Delta Force
Which expensive vinegar is aged in wooden barrels? Balsamic
Who played Indiana Jones in the films? Harrison Ford
Who changed his name from Gordon Sumner to top the charts? Sting
Which Welsh Island is also known as Ynys Mon? Anglesey
In which country is Acapulco? Mexico
How many humps does a Bactrian camel have? 2
Which footballer was also known as 'The Divine Ponytail'? Roberto Baggio
What flavour is the liqueur Cointreau? Orange
Which canal took 10 years to build and opened in 1869? The Suez Canal
How is the number 14 written in Roman numerals? XIV
Which planet is closest to the sun? Mercury
Which Disney film features the song 'The Bear Necessities'? The Jungle Book
What type of creature is a Guillemot? A Bird
Before Winston Churchill went bald, what colour was his hair? Red/Ginger
Which country was the first to legalise abortion? Iceland
Which gentle water creature gives its name to a Florida river? Manatee
What nationality was the famous spy Mata Hari - Dutch, Austrian, French? Dutch
Which game can be 'lawn' or 'crown green'? Bowls
Through which organ do fish get oxygen? Gills
What type of creature is a 'clouded yellow'? A butterfly
Cacti are native to which country? Mexico
In the proverb, imitation is the sincerest form of what? Flattery
What name is given to an angle greater than 90 degrees but less than 180 degrees? Obtuse
How many red balls are on the table at the start of a frame of snooker? 15
What is the only English word anagram of 'wrong'? Grown
What is a young single Spanish lady called? Senorita
Which soccer side had a hit with 'I'm forever blowing bubbles'? West Ham United
What cheese shares its name with an English Gorge? Cheddar
Sardines and pilchards belong to which family of fish? Herring
What is the highest mountain in the Alps? Mont Blanc
Larry Holmes is famous for which sport? Boxing
Whose catchphrase was 'Ooo you are awful but I like you'? Dick Emery
In which continent is the world's largest glacier? Antarctica
What is the name of a whale's breathing organ? Lungs
Who had a 1970's hit with 'Yellow River'? Christy
Which poisonous substance is also known as 'Woolly Rock'? Asbestos
Which word can go before Down, Jumping and Off? Show
How many times is the word 'Annie' mentioned in the song 'Annie's Song'? 0
Scientists claim that every minute, about 900 million tons of what hits the earth? Rain
In Australian slang, what is a 'Thunder Box'? Toilet
Who played Mary in the Film 'There's Something About Mary'? Cameron Diaz
What is Thailand's biggest island? Phuket
Which UK Chancellor of the Exchequer said, "The difference between tax avoidance and tax evasion is the thickness of a prison wall."? Denis Healey
The Yas Marina Grand Prix circuit is in which country? Abu Dhabi
Who was the first black man to appear on the cover of American Vogue? LeBron James
Which English county cricket team play at the Rose Bowl? Hampshire
On which river is the German town of Wittenburg? Elbe
Where in the human body is the radius? Forearm
Who is the voice of baby Mikey in the 1989 film Look Who's Talking? Bruce Willis
An eyas is what young creature taken from the wild for training? Hawk
Which singer's epitaph is 'True To His Own Spirit'? Jim Morrison
What is the spiked stick or prod used for driving cattle called? Goad
What ice-cream dish is named after an Australian opera singer? Peach Melba
Lammas Day falls on the first day of which month? August
What is the name of the platform or stand used to support a coffin? Catafalque
What type of creature is a canvasback? Duck
Which country has the international registraion RA? Argentina
Who was the mother of British monarchs Charles II and James II? Henrietta Maria of France
Which prehistoric period followed the Stone Age and preceded the Iron Age? Bronze Age
What is the science of accurate time measurement called? Chronometry
President Anwar Sadat of Egypt and which prime minister were jointly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1978? Menachen Begin
Maurice Cole was the real name of which popular funny UK Radio and TV personality? Kenny Everett
What was Barbara Windsor's first Carry On film? Carry On Spying
In a game of English draughts how many pieces does each player normally begin with? Twelve
Jasper National Park is in which country? Canada
In which century was the Bank of England founded? 17th
In medicine a Mantoux test is a skin test for diagnosing immunity from which disease? TB
In which English county is the Dickens World Theme Park? Kent
Who wrote the one-act comedy play Power Lunch? Alan Ball
What is the fin on the back of a fish called? Dorsal
Duma is a legislative body in the ruling asesembly of which country? Russia
The live album Beauty and the Beat featured pianist George Shearring and which singer? Peggy Lee
Whose band was the Tijuana Brass? Herb Alpert
Who were Cliff Richard's backing group through the 60s? The Shadows
Who were the famous backing singers on most of Elvis Presley's early hits? The Jordanaires
The Stratocaster is a model of which guitar maker? Fender
Which piano-playing singer's first hit was The Fat Man? Fats Domino
Which American rock'n'roll star caused controversy when he married a young teenager? Jerry Lee Lewis
Who made the highly rated 1959 jazz album Kind of Blue? Miles Davis
Which iconic British female singer made the highly regarded album titled '(her first name) in Memphis' ? Dusty Springfield
Whose band was the All Stars? Junior Walker
Larry Adler played what instrument? Harmonica
Whose childhood hit was Fingertips? Stevie Wonder
Which guitar innovator and player has a range of Gibson Guitars named after him? Les Paul
The founding brother members of the Kinks were Ray and Dave what? Davies
What was Smokey Robinson's most famous band called? The Miracles
Kenny Ball and his Jazzmen's 1962 hit was called March of the ... what? Siamese Children
Who sang the hit theme song Rawhide? Frankie Laine
John Mayall's band which helped launch Eric Clapton's career was called what? Bluesbreakers
Rock Around the Clock was a hit for Bill Haley and his ... what? Comets
Which comedy actor had a novelty hit with My Boomerang Won't Come Back? Charlie Drake
Who sang with Serge Gainsbourg on the hit Je t'aime? Jane Birkin
Colin Blunstone fronted which 1960s group? The Zombies
What Eastenders star sang on the novelty hit Come Outside? Wendy Richard
Jiles Perry (JP) Richardson Jr, who died in the same plane crash as Ritchie Valens and Buddy Holly was better known by what name? Big Bopper
Which later-to-be-famous solo singer and guitarist toured as a member of the Beach Boys in the mid 60s? Glen Campbell
Who had sang the hit song Little Old Wine Drinker Me? Dean Martin
What famous 'two-fingered' jazz guitarist died in 1953? Django Reinhardt
What song, released to promote the film The Millionairess, featured its stars Peter Sellers and Sophia Loren? Goodness Gracious Me
Who managed the Beatles' prior to his early death in 1967? Brian Epstein
Whose nickname was a derived from the term satchel-mouth? Louis Armstrong
What's the name of the motorbiker who dies in the Shangri-Las' hit The Leader of the Pack? Jimmy
Which singing-songwriting founder of the Flying Burrito Brothers died age 26, after which his body was 'stolen' by a friend and burnt in the Joshua Tree National Park? Gram Parsons
Which American singer and entertainer was nicknamed Schnozzola, because of his large nose? Jimmy Durante
Who wrote and had a hit with the instrumental Classical Gas? Mason Williams
Who wrote Patsy Cline's hit Crazy? Willie Nelson
What city hosted the Beatles as the resident band at the Kaiserkeller and Top Ten Club? Hamburg
The Isley Brothers' hit was called Behind a ... what? Painted Smile
1950-60s record turntables commonly offered four speeds: 33, 45, 78, and what other? 16
American DJ Robert Weston Smith was better known by what stage name? Wolfman Jack
What ridiculously titled song was a hit in 1954 for Max Bygraves in the UK and the Four Lads in the USA? Gilly Gilly Ossenfeffer Katzenellen Bogen by the Sea
Who had the 1965 instrumental hit Spanish Flea? Herb Alpert and the Tijuana Brass
What was Emile Ford and the Checkmates' 1959 hit, supposedly the longest ever question in a UK No1 song title? What Do You Want to Make Those Eyes at Me For?
Who singer-guitarist's backing band was The Bruvvers? Joe Brown
Which Rolling Stones guitarist died in a swimming pool in 1969? Brian Jones
Who founded the Tamla Motown record label? Berry Gordy
What folksy British singer-songwriting guitarist was famous also for his whistling? Roger Whittaker
What was Hugo Montenegro's instrumental hit, composed by Ennio Morricone for the film of the same name? The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly
Tom Parker managed which huge star? Elvis Presley
Who won (barefoot) the British Eurovision Song Contest in 1967 with Puppet on String? Sandie Shaw
The 1956 inaugural Eurovision Song Contest featured Belgium, France, Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Italy and which other country? Switzerland
Who originally fronted (and currently, 2008, still fronts) Herman's Hermits? Peter Noone
Which jazz singer, whose career actually spanned the 1930s-90s, was known as the First Lady of Song? Ella Fitzgerald
Which singer played Alfie's girlfriend Siddie in the 1966 film? Millicent Martin
What name was given to the 1950-60s mainstream country music style of artists including Patsy Cline, Tammy Wynette, Jim Reeves, and Charlie Rich? Nashville Sound
What Canadian-born teen idol of the 1950s-60s wrote the lyrics to Sinatra's song My Way? Paul Anka
Which harmonica-paying frontman of Manfred Man sang on their early hits and later became a successful radio presenter? Paul Jones
Which motor city was the original the base of Tamla Motown? Detroit
What group became famous in the 1960s for their parody impressions of other hit songs? The Barron Knights
Peter Potter in the USA and David Jacobs in the UK presented which pop music TV show? Juke Box Jury
What was the 1962 space-age instrumental hit by the Tornados? Telstar
Who wrote and sang the novelty hit Hello Muddah, Hello Fadduh, about Camp Granada? Allan Sherman
Who was the famous rock guitarist in the group Love Sculpture, notably featuring on their breakneck hit version of Khachaturian's classical piece Sabre Dance? Dave Edmunds
Rolf Harris endorsed what new musical instrument, which supposedly features on David Bowie's hit Space Oddity? Stylophone
Frank Sinatra, Dean Martin, and Sammy Davis Junior were among several entertainers given what collective nickname? The Rat Pack
Who originated the 'Wall of Sound' record production technique? Phil Spector
The Rolling Stones first record label was what? Decca
Simon and Garfunkel's song Mrs Robinson featured in what 1967 film? The Graduate
What American DJ was nicknamed Moondog? Alan Freed
What was Stephane Grappelli's instrument? Violin
Which gravel-voiced English singer was previously a gas-fitter from Sheffield? Joe Cocker
Who made the 1962 hit Monster Mash? Bobby
Who sang the title song of the film The Girl Can't Help It? Little Richard
What was Gary Glitter's earlier stage name in the 1960s? Paul Raven
Lulu sang the theme song to which 1967 film about an inner-city school, starring Sidney Poitier? To Sir, With Love
What Eddie Cochran song, covered by the Who, told of frustrations with his boss and his congressman? Summertime Blues
Who was the main singing star in the musical Half a Sixpence? Tommy Steele
Which comedian's recordings featured hilarious telephone routines about King Kong and the introduction of Tobacco? Bob Newhart
What long-running BBC Radio chart show began on the Light Programme in 1955, and later becoming hugely popular when presented by Alan Freeman? Pick of the Pops
The Crickets backed which famous singer-songwriter? Buddy Holly
Dizzy Gillespie played what instrument? Trumpet
Who made the novelty song Jake the Peg? Rolf Harris
Which 1960s British rock'n'roll star founded the Official Monster Raving Loony Party? Screaming Lord Sutch
Who was nicknamed 'The Big O'? Roy Orbison
Which member of the Hollies went on to join the hugely successful American band commonly known by their initials CSNY? Graham Nash
What record label did the Beatles establish? Apple
Who had a 1960s hit with Step Inside Love? Cilla Black
The record label and music company name HMV stood for what? His Master's Voice
Who sang the theme song to the film Born Free? Matt Monro
Congratulations was Cliff Richard's Eurovision Song Contest entry in what year? 1968
Which singer's Eurovision Song Contest entry was Knock Knock (Who's There?) Mary Hopkin
Whose big hit was I love You Because? Jim Reeves
Who wrote the instrumental A Swingin' Safari and led the orchestra which played the original hit version? Bert Kaempfert
The Copacabana nightclub was in which city? New York
Which British comedian had the massive-selling 1965 hit Tears? Ken Dodd
Who sang the 1964 hit My Boy Lollipop? Millie
Cher's partner was Sonny ... who? Bono
Who made the hit comedy version of the Banana Boat Song, and other similar spoofs including versions of Presley's Heartbreak Hotel and Johnnie Ray's Cry? Stan Freberg
Which 1960s easy-listening Irish crooner was famed for his rocking chair and knitted jumpers? Val Doonican
What was Chuck Berry's first hit record? Maybellene
What number gives its name to the cultish 'club' celebrating rock stars who died at that age? 27
Who was the first British monarch to broadcast a Christmas message to the nation? George the Fifth
Child star Jimmy Boyd sang which hugely popular 1950's Christmas song, which was initially banned by the Catholic Church in Boston because it supposedly mixed sex and Christmas? I saw Mommy kissing Santa Claus
Who banned Christmas in England between 1647 and 1660? Oliver Cromwell
On which date is Epiphany celebrated in the traditional Western calendar? 6th January
Who are the four ghosts in Charles Dickens' A Christmas Carol? Christmas Past, Christmas Present, Christmas Yet to Come, and Jacob Marley
What liqueur goes into making a 'snowball' cocktail? Advocaat
What is the English title of the carol written in 1818 by Austrian priest Josef Mohr originally called Stille Nacht? Silent Night
The Nordic countries (Denmark, Sweden, Norway notably) tend to celebrate Christmas chiefly on which date? 24th December
Which US state in 1907 was the last to declare Christmas a legal holiday? Oklahoma
Presepe in Italy refers to what Christmas tradition? Nativity scene
Christmas Crackers is cockney rhyming slang for which part of the male anatomy? Testicles
What is the popular name for little baked sausages wrapped in rashers of streaky bacon? Pigs in blankets
Which of the Wise Men was said to have brought the gift of gold for the baby Jesus? Melchior
The 1954 movie White Christmas was the first to be made using what new Paramount film format? VistaVision
Which river did George Washington cross on Christmas night in 1776 in the American Revolutionary War? Delaware
What changed in 1752 which caused Britain to have a White Christmas less frequently thereafter? The calendar
Traditional in Germany at Christmas, what sort of food is stollen? Cake
According to the UK National Meteorological Office what year (prior to 2007) was the last White Christmas in Britain? 2004
The Christmas period of 1813-14 saw the last what in London? Christmas Fair on a frozen River Thames
How many gifts are given in total in the song The Twelve Days of Christmas? 364
The words "Myrrh is mine, its bitter perfume breathes of life, of gathering gloom..." come from which Christmas carol? We Three Kings of Orient Are
Christmas Island in the Indian Ocean is a territory of which country? Australia
Which diarist noted on 25th December 1662, "(Christmas Day). Had a pleasant walk to White Hall, where I intended to have received the communion with the family, but I have come too late...? Samuel Pepys
The USA's official National Christmas Tree is in which National Park? King's Canyon National Park, California
John Callcott Horsley designed what first commercial Christmas item in 1843? Christmas card
In Victorian England what people were popularly called robins because of their red uniforms? Postmen
Which popular poem was alternatively known as A Visit from St Nicholas? 'Twas The Night before Christmas
Which token vegetable is often included in the ingredients of a Christmas pudding? Carrot
What animal is Snowball in George Orwell's book Animal Farm? A pig
Yorkshireman William Strickland is believed to have brought the first what to Britain from North America in 1526? Turkey
Which missing adventurer's wrecked aircraft and bodily remains were found in California in October 2008? Steve Fossett
Who resigned as Ireland's Taoiseach (pronounced 'teeshock' - it is the head of government) in May 2008 after more than ten years in the position? Bertie Ahern
In 2008 billionaire financier Carl Icahn joined the board of what large internet corporation in a deal which saw him cease his fight to oust its leaders? Yahoo
The South Ossetia war was fought between Russia and which other country? Georgia
By how many years to the day did OJ Simpson's conviction for robbery and kidnapping follow his acquittal of murder? Thirteen
The NASA spacecraft Messenger reached what planet destination in 2008? Mercury
Human Rights Watch announced in October 2008 that what country is the world's most ignored tragedy? Somalia
Who in 2008 was re-elected Prime Minister of Canada? Stephen Harper
Who in 2008 was denied parole (again) for the murder of John Lennon? Mark Chapman
George Tupou V was crowned monarch of which country in August 2008? Tonga
Chinese Democracy was the long awaited 2008 album release of which band? Guns N' Roses
Who was Fiona Shackleton representing when she had a jug of water poured over her in February 2008? Paul McCartney
Architect Rafael Viñoly designed what notable Leicester building which opened in 2008? The Curve Theatre
For which national team did the cricketer play who was alleged to have called an Australian opponent a monkey, resulting in the suspension of the Australian tour of that country? India
Which film director, with successes including Cold Mountain and The Talented Mr Ripley, died on 18 March 2008? Anthony Minghella
Which chain announced the closure of 600 US branches in July 2008? Starbucks
In which city did the Newseum museum of news and journalism re-open in April 2008? Washington DC
Who did Portsmouth beat 1-0 to win the FA Cup in May 2008? Cardiff City
Who wrote the much covered and 2008 hit song Hallelujah? Leonard Cohen
On Rudy Giuliani's withdrawal from the contest for the Republican 2008 US presidential election nomination who received Giuliani's endorsement? John McCain
Which original and long lost member of the Manic Street Preachers was declared dead on 24 November 2008? Richey Edwards
What is the name of Google's web browser, launched in September 2008? Google Chrome
Who won the 2008 American (celebrity) Apprentice TV show? Piers Morgan
What 2008 film set in 1880s America starred and was directed by Ed Harris? Appaloosa
Which country won the most medals in total at the 2008 Summer Olympics? USA
In October 2008 which country was first to follow Ireland in announcing it would guarantee all bank deposits, in the wake of the global financial crisis? Greece
Which Eastern guru to the Beatles died on 5 February 2008? Maharishi Mahesh Yogi
What venue hosted the 2008 Superbowl? University of Phoenix Stadium
Which American entertainer famously parodied Sarah Palin during the 2008 US presidential elections? Tina Fey
What hip-hop artist was controversially chosen to headline the 2008 Glastonbury Festival? Jay-Z
Which American artist noted for his large graffiti-style paintings had a major exhibition at London's Tate Modern in Summer 2008? Cy Twombly
Who won the UK 2008 Apprentice TV show and the resulting job with Sir Alan Sugar? Lee McQueen
Who starred as Batman in the film Dark Knight? Christian Bale
What was Abdel Kechiche's 2008 film about France's North African community? Couscous
Who ran the fraudulent $50bn investment pyramid scheme, further exposing in December 2008 the stupidity of the world's financial system? Bernard Madoff
Who released the album Do You Like Rock Music? British Sea Power
Who threw his shoes at George W Bush in December 2008? Muntadhar al Zeidi
Which club won the Coca Cola Football League Championship for the 2007-08 season? West Bromwich Albion
Who won the UK 2008 X-Factor TV talent show? Alexandra Burke
Which secretive artist's supposed real identity was 'outed' in 2008 as Robert Gunningham by the Mail on Sunday? Banksy
Which rock group won the 2008 Mercury Prize? Elbow
What successful 2008 film starring Angelina Jolie did Clint Eastwood direct? Changeling
Which iconic fashion designer died on 1 June 2008? Yves Saint Laurent
Ari Folman's acclaimed 2008 film was 'Waltz with...' whom? Bashir
Nelson Evora won which country's only gold medal at the 2008 Summer Olympics? Portugal
Which scientist and novelist, and author of '2001: A Space Odyssey' died on 19 March 2008? Arthur C Clarke
Which actor was the butt of Jonathan Ross and Russell Brand's prank calls which nearly ended civilisation as we know it in October 2008? Andrew Sachs
Who won 3 gold medals for Great Britain at the 2008 Summer Olympics, and was named 2008 BBC Sports Personality of the Year? Chris Hoy
Which country won the 2008 Eurovision Song Contest? Russia
Which country ended its combat role in Iraq on 1 June 2008 with the withdrawal of its 500 troops from Nasiriyah? Australia
What was Julian Schnabel's acclaimed 2008 film of the book written by a stroke victim's blinking eye? The Diving Bell and the Butterfly
Who was buried in Donskoy Necropolis on 6 August 2008? Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn
Which city hosted in 2008 the 65th anniversary of the oldest film festival in the world? Venice
Who won the 2008 Superbowl? New York Giants
Who won best actor at the 80th Academy Awards of 2008? Daniel Day-Lewis
Who resigned as Prime Minister of Pakistan on 18 August 2008? Pervez Musharraf
In what city did Barack Obama formally accept the Democratic nomination for the US presidential election? Denver, Colorado
Which driver did Louis Hamilton overtake in the final seconds of the Brazilian Grand Prix to clinch fifth place and thereby win the 2008 F1 Championship? Timo Glock
What were Bertha, Cristobel and Dolly on 20 July 2008? Storms
Which country won the 2008 Africa Cup of Nations (the African international soccer championship)? Egypt
In which country did the world's largest ferris wheel (as at 2008) open for rides in March 2008? Singapore
Who did the government appoint as executive chairman of Northern Rock after its nationalisation? Ron Sandler
Rail workers in California were banned from doing what on moving trains after a crash was found to have been caused by the activity in September 2008? Using mobile phones
From January 2008 people seeking a visa to visit the UK were required to provide what additional form of identity? Fingerprints
Which company did French president Sarkozy and his then girlfriend Carla Bruni sue in 2008 for unauthorised use of their images in an advert? Ryanair
G Kennedy Thompson was fired in June 2008 from which US bank and early victim of the credit crunch? Wachovia
Nepal re-named a remote airport near Mount Everest as what in February 2008? Tenzing-Hillary Airport
In March 2008 the Shin Bet secret service of what country launched a blog written by four of its agents? Israel
The Detroit Redwings beat the Pittsburgh Penguins to win the 2008 Stanley Cup in which sport? Ice hockey
In March 2008 the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation announced a photographic competition to mark the International Year of the what? Potato
What political correspondent voluntarily removed himself from the UK Strictly Come Dancing celebrity talent show for fear of undersevedly winning it? John Sergeant
Which club won the 2008 Australian Football League Grand Final? Hawthorn
Who won the 2008 French Women's Singles (tennis) Open Championship? Ana Ivanovic
Quentin Bryce became the first woman to hold what office in September 2008? Governor-General of Australia
Which jazz musician and presenter of BBC Radio's I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue died on 25 April 2008? Humphrey Lyttelton
Which UK member of parliament resigned in June 2008 to fight the Haltemprice and Howden election on a civil liberties platform? David Davis
Who won the 2008 American Idol TV talent show? David Cook
In what city did its kingdom's first women-only hotel and spa, called the Luthan, open in March 2008? Riyadh
Which Indian city organised 'No Honking Day' to mark World Health Day, 7 April 2008, emphasising noise pollution as a significant health issue. Mumbai
What candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination for the 2008 US election withdrew from the contest on 10 January 2008? Bill Richardson
Which country did cyclone Nargis devastate on 2 May 2008? Burma
What stadium nicknamed 'The House That Ruth Built' closed in November 2008? Yankee Stadium
Who did Tiger Woods beat in a play-off for the 2008 US Open Championship? Rocco Mediate
Who led Zimbabwe's Movement for Democratic Change opposition against Robert Mugabe in 2008? Morgan Tsvangirai
Who was the trader alleged to be responsible for the French Société Générale trading loss of nearly five billion euros in January 2008? Jérôme Kerviel
Which two companies agreed in February 2008 to pay their customers $200m compensation for price fixing? Virgin Atlantic and British Airways
How many gold medals did Great Britain win at the 2008 Summer Olympics? 19
A court in which country was reported in March 2008 to have convicted a bear for stealing honey from a beekeeper? Macedonia
Which highly regarded British literary agent died on 20 October 2008? Pat Kavanagh
Put these countries - Mexico, Brazil, India - in order of most gold medals won in the 2008 Summer Olympics. Brazil, Mexico, India
Which was the only country to win two silver medals and no other medals at the 2008 Summer Olympics? Trinidad and Tobago
The sales and reputation of what cheese were affected when toxins were believed to have contaminated buffalo milk? Mozzarella
Name the British Airways chief executive who had to do a lot of apologising for the Heathrow Terminal 5 chaos in March 2008? Willie Walsh
Which film star (of Brokeback Mountain fame) died on 22 Jan 2008? Heath Ledger
The European Court of Justice ruled that Marks and Spencer could reclaim £3.5m in 20 years' overpaid vat due to the incorrect categorisation of what product? Teacakes
Which famous artist and and children's book illustrator died on 28 May 2008? Beryl Cook
Which notable CEO stepped down on 27 June 2008 to concentrate on his charity work? Bill Gates
During Prime Minister's Questions at the House of Commons in December 2008 Gordon Brown amusingly and accidentally claimed his government had saved what? The World
A surprise attack, and collective noun for group of tigers? Ambush
ACAS is the UK's Advisory, Conciliation and 'what' Service? Arbitration
A robot, from the Greek word for male? Android
Capital of the United Arab Emirates? Abu Dhabi
The letter denoting a link in HTML (webpage) code typically followed by 'href'? A
The word for the weight on the end of a pendulum? Bob
Maureen Lipman's onomatopaeic character name in BT's TV adverts? Beattie
Composer of the Eroica, Pastoral and Choral Symphonies? Beethoven
The initials BCC on a memo or email stand for a 'what' Carbon Copy? Blind
The meaning of B in the marketing abbreviation B2B? Business
The British Queens to Georges II and IV, with respective titles of Ansbach and Brunswick? Caroline
Addictive product produced in a British factory first by Robert Gloag in 1856? Cigarettes
Tragically misunderstood daughter of Shakespeare's King Lear? Cordelia
Sri Lanka's previous name? Ceylon
The Spanish word for a hundred? Cien
With what is a 'carpetbag steak' stuffed? Oysters
In language a paronomasia is more commonly known as what? Pun
Which early Charles Dickens novel features the characters Wackford and Fanny Squeers, Smike, Newman Noggs and the Cheeryble brothers? Nicholas Nickleby
How many balls, including the white cue ball, are on a snooker table (before any are potted)? Twenty-two
In Western ecclesiastical law a diriment impediment invalidates what? Marriage
Who is generally credited with the invention of the hovercraft in 1955? Christopher Cockerell
What colour is the letter L in the standard Google logo? Green
How many stars are on the flag of the European Union? Twelve
Who wrote the poem beginning, "Stop all the clocks, cut off the telephone.." which featured in the funeral scene of the film Four Weddings and a Funeral? W H Auden
Tallinn is the capital of which country? Estonia
What colour is Stephanie's hair in the children's TV series LazyTown? Pink
Which English playwright and poet was stabbed in uncertain circumstances in 1593 age 29 (he penned the line 'Come live with me and be my love')? Christopher Marlowe
Who won 'The Battle of the Sexes' tennis match at the Houston Astrodome in 1973? Billie Jean King
Kenneth Kaunda was the first president of which African country? Zambia
What is the common word for the monosaccharide substance found in certain fruit, flower nectar and honey, with the chemical formula C6H12O6? Fructose
The cult TV series Lost which began in 2004 features 'Oceanic Flight ...' what? 815
The billionnaire Barclay twins' long-running disputes about their private island Brecqhou (or Brechou) are with which Channel Island? Sark
Which Scottish athlete refused to run on a Sunday at the 1924 Paris Olympic Games? Eric Liddle
What does K stand for in the CMYK colour model used in printing? Key
The King and Queen of which European country narrowly escaped assassination on their wedding day in 1906? Spain
Marsh Fever is another term for which ailment? Malaria
What is the offspring of a male lion and a tigress called (apart from very dangerous)? Liger
Jazz musician Miles Davis, 1926-91, whose 1959 album Kind of Blue is generally regarded as the biggest selling jazz album of all time, played what instrument? Trumpet
What is the capital of Sierra Leone? Freetown
What is the (traditionally wooden) housing or stand which contains a ship's compass? Binnacle
Who played Al Capone in the 1987 film, The Untouchables? Robert De Niro
Which character did James Stewart play in the 1952 film, The Greatest Show On Earth? Buttons the Clown
Who wrote the novel On Chesil Beach? Ian McEwan
What is the surname of the family in the UK TV series My Family? Harper
Which instrument represents the duck in Prokofiev's Peter and the Wolf? Oboe
Who played Richard Cunningham in the US TV show Happy Days? Ron Howard
How to Save a Life was which band's debut album? The Fray
Which UK TV series was based on Eric Chappell's play The Banana Box? Rising Damp
Jan Morrow and Brad Allen are characters who share a phone line in which 1959 film? Pillow Talk
How many contestants' boxes feature in the (UK version) TV show Deal of No Deal? Twenty-two
By what name was rapper Christopher Wallace most famously known? The Notorious B.I.G.
Daisy Donovan, Iain Lee, and MacKenzie Crook were presenters on which 1990's UK TV show? The 11 O'Clock Show
What is the number on the roof of the bus in the 1994 film Speed? 2525
Pixel, Stingy and Stephanie appear in which children's TV programme? LazyTown
In which year was the UK Comic Relief launched? 1985
What is the name of the title character in Arthur Miller's play Death of a Salesman? Willy Loman
In the 1979 film Apocalypse Now which river does Captain Willard (Martin Sheen) travel up to reach Colonel Kurtz (Marlon Brando)? Nung
What is the first name of Frank Gallagher's legal wife in the UK TV series Shameless? Monica
In which US state did Buddy Holly's plane crash in 1959? Iowa
Nicky Hambleton-Jones presents which UK TV make-over show? Ten Years Younger
What was Humphrey Bogart's last film? The Harder They Fall
What was mixed with water to make the rain more visible on screen in the 1952 film Singing in the Rain? Milk
What is the name of the family doctor in The Simpsons cartoon show? Doctor Julius Hibbert
Who played Domino in the 1983 Bond film Never Say Never Again? Kim Basinger
Who designed the costumes for the 1997 film The Fifth Element? Jean-Paul Gaultier
Doctor Moriarty is the arch-enemy of which fictional detective? Sherlock Holmes
What was the title of George Michael's first solo album? Faith
Brad Pitt played one of Anthony Hopkins' three sons in which 1994 film? Legends of the Fall
Tall Dark and Gruesome is the title of whose autobiography? Christopher Lee
In which month is St David's Day celebrated? March
New York is on which river? Hudson
On which planet is the Great Dark Spot? Neptune
Which famous London sculpture is the work of Sir Alfred Gilbert? Eros
In which English county is Nunney Castle? Somerset
An icosahedron is a three-dimensional form with how many faces? Twenty
What colour are the flowers on the St John's Wort? Yellow
What is the young of an otter called? Whelp
What 'colour' was actor Steve Buscemi in the film Reservoir Dogs? Pink
What chemical element has the symbol Kr? Krypton
What word is the opposite of zenith? Nadir
Which character did Dustin Hoffman play in the film Midnight Cowboy? Ratso
Joan of Arc is also known as the 'Maid of..' where? Orleans
What type of animal is a Border Leicester? Sheep
In anatomy what is the technical term for the kneecap? Patella
Long-winged seabird and golfing term? Albatross
What is the first name of Paul McCartney's fashion designer daughter? Stella
What is the first letter of the Greek alphabet? Alpha
What is the flavour of the liqueur Amaretto? Almond
Which poet wrote The Divine Comedy? Dante
Where was the 1986 World Cup held? Mexico
Who was the last player to captain England before David Beckham? Martin Keown
What football club did Gordon Banks play for when he won his 1966 World Cup medal? Leicester City
Fill in the missing name in this sequence of England managers: Ramsey, Mercer, Revie, ? , Robson. Ron Greenwood
Which of these players never scored a hat-trick for England: Bobby Charlton, Gary Lineker, Paul Scholes, Luther Blissett, Teddy Sheringham, Alan Shearer? Teddy Sheringham
England coaches Sammy Lee and Ray Clemence played together at which club? Liverpool
How many places were allocated to African teams for the 2006 World Cup? Five
What did all these players win between 1989 and 1997: Paul Merson, Matt Le Tissier, Lee Sharpe, Ryan Giggs, Andy Cole, Robbie Fowler and David Beckham? The (PFA) Young Player of the Year award, 1989-97
Aside from goalkeepers, which two England captains since 1966 never scored their country? Mick Mills and Trevor Cherry.
Which of these players never captained England's senior team: Peter Beardsley, Paul Ince, David Seaman, Bobby Charlton, Gordon Banks? Gordon Banks
Who was England's football manager in the 1970 World Cup? Sir Alf Ramsey
How many players in England's 2006 World Cup squad were also in the 1998 squad? And to ask a tougher question, name them..) Five - Sol Campbell, Gary Neville, David Beckham, Michael Owen and Rio Ferdinand
Which manager first appointed David Beckham as England captain? Peter Taylor
Who was the first player to play for England who had not been born when England won the world cup in 1966? Tony Adams
What was the score after extra time before England lost on penalties to Portugal in the quarter final of the European Championship in June 2004? 2-2
In what World Cup did the England goals by Mariner, Robson and Francis feature in games against France, Czechoslovakia and Kuwait? Spain 1982
Who was England's first national team manager? Walter Winterbottom
Whose injury made way for Geoff Hurst in England's 1966 World Cup team? Jimmy Greaves
Who was the first defender to captain England after Bobby Moore? Emlyn Hughes
What football club did Bobby Charlton play for when he won his 1966 World Cup medal? Manchester United
Who was the first £100,000 football transfer? Dennis Law
What decade was the white ball legalised in football? 1950's
What did these players all win between 1963 and 1968: Lev Yashin, Dennis Law, Eusebio, Bobby Charlton, Florian Albert and George Best? European Footballer of the Year award
Who was the first football transfer over £100,000 between English clubs? Alan Ball (from Blackpool to Everton in 1966)
Where and when were the three World Cup tournaments that England failed to qualify for after 1966? West Germany 1974, Argentina 1978 and USA 1994
Where was the 1962 World Cup held? Chile
Who were England's full backs in the 1966 World Cup Final? Ray Wilson and George Cohen
Who was the first £1m football transfer between English clubs? Trevor Francis
What football club did Bobby Moore play for when he won his 1966 World Cup medal? West Ham United
Bobby Moore and Billy Wright share the record for the number of games as England captain with 90 each. At the start of the 2006 World Cup which player captained England the most times aside from Moore and Wright? Bryan Robson
Who was the first £2m football transfer between English clubs? Paul Gasgoigne
What height and width is a football goal? Eight feet high (2.4m) and eight yards wide
What football club did Jackie Charlton play for when he won his 1966 World Cup medal? Leeds United
Who, according to FIFA regulations, was responsible for supplying the footballs for the 2006 World Cup qualifying stage games? The host football association, ie., Germany
In what decade was England's first national team manager appointed? 1940's
What football club did Roger Hunt play for when he won his 1966 World Cup medal? Liverpool
In what World Cups did Bryan Robson appear? 1982, 1986 and 1990
What is the minimum rest period between two games for any team at the 2006 World Cup according to FIFA competition rules? 48 hours
Which 1970 World Cup England striker retired to run a successful West Midlands window cleaning business? Jeff Astle
Fill in the missing name in this sequence of England managers: Taylor, Venables, Hoddle, ?  Keegan. Howard Wilkinson
Who were England's three goalkeepers in the 1982 World Cup? Ray Clemence, Peter Shilton, and .......? Joe Corrigan
What did all of these players win between 1995 and 1999: Jurgen Klinsmann, Eric Cantona, Gian Franco Zola, Dennis Bergkamp and David Ginola? Winners of the English Football Player of the Year award
What football club did Nobby Stiles play for when he won his 1966 World Cup medal? Manchester United
Which past England captain is the only player in English football to have captained an English Football League-winning club in three different decades? Tony Adams
How many places were allocated to European teams for the 2006 World Cup, including the hosts Germany? Fourteen
Who appeared most times for England and how many times? Peter Shilton, 125 caps
Between the 1966 and 2006 World Cups only four England captains have played for three different clubs while captaining their country, who are they? Paul Ince
What football club did Geoff Hurst play for when he won his 1966 World Cup medal? West Ham United
What decade was the crossbar introduced in Football? 1870's
Who broke his neck in the 1956 FA Cup Final? Bert Trautmann of Manchester City
Who was the first football transfer over £10m between English clubs? Alan Shearer
Who replaced David Seaman as England's third choice goalkeeper in the 1990 World Cup squad after Seaman injured his thumb in training? Dave Beasant
Where was the 1978 World Cup held? Argentina
FIFA's 2006 World Cup rules dictate a squad size of how many players? Twenty-three
In what World Cup did Mark Hateley and Gary Lineker wear the 9 and 10 shirts? 1986
What did each of these players win between 1996 and 2000: Matthias Sammer, Ronaldo, Zinedine Zedane, Rivaldo, and Luis Figo? European Footballer of the Year award
Where was the 1998 World Cup held? France
Who was the first black footballer to win a full England cap? Viv Anderson, 1978
What football club did Martin Peters play for when he won his 1966 World Cup medal? West Ham United
Which manager took England to the semi-final of the world cup in 1990? Bobby Robson
Whose last game as manager of England was a 0-0 draw away to Portugal in 1974? Sir Alf Ramsey
It is said that an international football match in 1969 started a war between which two nations in the central Americas? El Salvador v Honduras
What football club did George Cohen play for when he won his 1966 World Cup medal? Fulham
How many medals will be awarded to each of the first, second and third placed teams at the 2006 World Cup? Forty-five - that's 45 to each team. Amazing - who gets them all? If you know please tell me..
Who were England's four successful penalty takers in the winning 4-2 penalty shoot-out against Spain in the Euro-96 Championship quarter-final at Wembley? Shearer, Platt, Pearce, and Gascoigne
What football club did Ray Wilson play for when he won his 1966 World Cup medal? Everton
Which team did England beat in the 1990 World Cup when Gary Lineker's second successful penalty of the game gave England victory in extra time? Cameroon
What football club did Alan Ball play for when he won his 1966 World Cup medal? Blackpool
In the event of a team failing to fulfil or complete a match at the 2006 World Cup Final tournament, what is the score awarded to the other team by the organising committee? 3-0
Who scored England's dying seconds winner against Belgium in the 1990 World Cup? David Platt
How many managers had been in charge of the England football team before Alf Ramsey? Just one
Who was England's goalkeeper in the losing game against Germany in the 1970 World Cup? Peter Bonetti
Who was Everton's representative in England's 1966 World Cup winning team? Ray Wilson
Where are the headquarters of FIFA (Federation Internationale de Football Association)? Zurich, Switzerland.
How many players in England's 2006 World Cup squad had previously captained their country? 4
THE ABOVE INPUTS ARE WORKING PERFECTLY!
One question... Is it possible to have this asking automatic questions?
Thanks!
Q)  Which Barbadian singer stayed ten weeks at number 1 with `Umbrella`?
A)   Rihanna
Q)   What does the information technology term RAM stand for?
A)   Random Access Memory
For the 1st question the answer stated is "Rihanna", if you typed 'rihanna' (lowercase) this would be an incorrect answer as the plugin reads direct off a .txt file.  In effect plurals would be incorrect sadly but all you can do is try to get the correct variation
INCORRECT
Q)  Which Barbadian singer stayed ten weeks at number 1 with `Umbrella`?
A)   rihanna
Q)   What does the information technology term RAM stand for?
A)   random access memory
As you can see the answers in the incorrect section are all lowercase, whereas in the correct version the first letters of abbreviations are capitalized or just even the 1st letter of certain words like "Rihanna"
Good Luck!
