Crystal Gayle Speaking Fee & Booking Agent Contact
Fee Range: Call for Booking Fee
Travels From: Available Upon Request
Available For: Corporate Appearances, Speaking Engagements, Autograph Signings, Endorsements, Meet & Greets and Keynote Speeches
Crystal Gayle Booking Agent Information
Contact Celebrity Talent Promotions now at 1-888-752-3532 to book Crystal Gayle for a guest appearance, motivational keynote speech, grand opening, autograph signing, product announcement, employee gathering, endorsement or speaking engagement. Our booking agents work on your behalf to get your organization the best price for your desired celebrity.
Booking agents at Celebrity Talent Promotions can assist with booking speakers such as Crystal Gayle for speaking engagements or appearances. Our agents have years of experience booking Musician and can provide availability, fees and all costs associated with hiring Crystal Gayle for your next corporate event. If your company is interested in finding out booking fees and availability for Crystal Gayle call us at 1.888.752.3532.
Crystal Gayle Biography
Crystal Gayle was born on January 9, 1951 and is an American country music singer best known for a series of country-pop crossover hits in the late 1970s and early 1980s, including Dont It Make My Brown Eyes Blue (Crystal has blue eyes) and the song Half The Way. An award-winning singer, she ...
>>Read More
Crystal Gayle was born on January 9, 1951 and is an American country music singer best known for a series of country-pop crossover hits in the late 1970s and early 1980s, including Dont It Make My Brown Eyes Blue (Crystal has blue eyes) and the song Half The Way. An award-winning singer, she accumulated 18 No. 1 country hits during the 1970s and 1980s. She is also famous for her nearly floor-length hair and was voted one of the 50 most beautiful people in the world in 1983. She is the younger sister of singer Loretta Lynn (16 years younger) and a distant cousin of singer Patty Loveless. Crystal Gayle has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, near Loretta Lynns star.
Musicians such as a Crystal Gayle have owned the stage with their electrifying performances and display of undeniable skill. These pop stars have topped the billboard charts and have captured the hearts of fans across the globe. The booking agents at Celebrity Talent Promotions can assist with Crystal Gayle speaking engagements or appearances. We have years of experience in booking Musicians for keynote speeches and autograph signings. Hiring a Musician like Crystal Gayle is not a hard process. Our agents can provide availability, fees and all costs associated in bringing out a successful Musician to your next corporate event.  We can find Crystal Gayle’s agent to make this booking happen.  A Crystal Gayle appearance will add energy to your upcoming event and reward employees, customers and clients. Most likely, fans and corporations can find Crystal Gayle‘s official website, charity involvement, Twitter account, representation, publicist and management info at http://www.celebritytalentpromotions.com. If your company is interested in finding out booking fees and availability for hiring a speaker, celebrity or Crystal Gayle for an appearance, autograph signing, endorsement or speaking engagement, call us at 1.888.752.3532 or fill out the booking form below.
﻿
Crystal Gayle  Speaking Videos
Disclaimer:
Some parts of the celebrities' biography may be used from Wikipedia, used under the GNU Free Documentation License. CelebrityTalentPromotions.com acts only as an celebrity broker for corporate functions, private events and speaking engagements, and does not claim or represent itself as Crystal Gayle's agent, speakers bureau, manager, publicist, assistant, PR firm or management company. Celebrity Talent Promotions is a Celebrity booking agency representing organizations seeking to hire motivational speakers, athletes, celebrities and corporate entertainment for private corporate events, celebrity endorsements, personal celebrity appearances, spokes person campaigns and speaking engagements. Crystal Gayle's booking and appearance fees, costs and prices on this website are estimates and only act as a guideline. Booking fees are determined by several factors, including location of event, the celebrities schedule, desired duties, supply and demand and other market factors. Bios on this site are for informational purposes
Check Availability
