www.bespokebureau.com, Author at Bespoke Bureau - Page 30 of 45
We offer a 12 month back up guarantee.
We offer world’s largest selection of Housekeepers.
We have good placement fees.
How Housekeepers can make a difference:
Any housekeeper can make a big difference to homes. If you have an extra room for your housekeeper then great.  This makes it cheaper to employ someone. Filipinas are loving, caring and hard working. These housekeepers are wonderful. Whatever the reason of your need, trust in us. Be sure that the best agency is ours.
What a Housekeeper can do for you:
If you find a very good housekeeper then you are in luck. Our housekeepers offers:
cooking.
Cost of a  domestic couple agency ?
Mature domestic couples sometimes charge more than other domestic couples. Same with very experienced couples. We offer a range from au pair couples to TOP end couples. It’s important that you use a  domestic couple agency  such as us to keep the prices of domestic couples down for you and your friends. This way you can get a good deal but also recommend us to your friends.
A daily domestic couple in London can cost from £6500-1200 a week net.
A live in domestic couple agency ranges from £550-1000 net a week.
The rate depends on the hours, duties, amount of children and so on.
Sometimes a domestic couple agency in London costs less and sometimes more.
If you want your domestic couple with certain service skills, they will cost more.
The more skills and experience you want, the more expensive it gets.
Find a domestic with us
If I find a  domestic couple agency  what duties can I expect to have performed?
A domestic couple will assist you in everything you need in your home.
They can cook.
They can do butler duties.
They can offer childcare duties.
Most domestic couples are happy to baby sit.
Some domestic couples live in.
Some domestic couples live out (daily domestic couples they are called).
Find a domestic couple agency in London with us and we will offer you:
Affordable domestic staff agency fees.
Vetted mature domestic couples.
How we can help you hire Domestic couple :
We understand how important it is that you  hire Domestic couple  that is great.
We will hand pick our favourite candidate.
We email you their details.
We will arrange for you to meet the candidates.
We can arrange a trial for you.
We will help you make an official offer.
A top domestic couple can really help your life
Why we are considered the best domestic couple agency:
All our business is done via recommendation.
We have an experienced team of staff.
Our offices are centrally located.
We will only help you find the best people.
Our staff will care for your home.
When you find a domestic couple via us, you can relax.
Our couples take a genuine interest in your home.
Our domestic couple hire service is affordable.
The staff have VIP or royal households experience.
Most our domestic couples have qualifications.
You get a 12 month guarantee with us.
Background checks when you hire domestic couple:
CRB checks are made on your request.
We will provide you with previous references.
We meet the staff when able to.
Candidates always come recommended to us.
Contact us to hire domestic couple :
Give us a ring on +442032900142 or email us on  info@bespokebureau.com .
Kind regards from Bespoke Bureau.
Blackwell House, Guildhall Yard, Bank, London, EC2V 5AE, UK.
Phone: +44 (0) 2032900142
VIP service.
Do’s and dont’s.
The objection of the Butler corporate events is to make sure that you and your team bond. We want you to have a good time. If you want to get certified then we can also provide you with diplomas/certificates in gold frames for this.
At your service-Bespoke Butler Agency
How does the Butler corporate events run?
They run just how you want them. We have 23 different modules. As our name, Bespoke suggests, we will tailor make the courses for you. We also have a standard course that we can deliver. The alternative is that you tell us roughly how you want things done and we work it all out for you. The attendants at the butler corporate events are instructed via theory and with hands-on training. This is our world famous and “trade mark” course.
The cost of Butler Corporate events
The cost will depend on:
1. The number of attendants.
2. How long you want the training for.
3. What modules you would like it to entail.
4. If you want to use our premises or for us to come to you.
Our promise is to always do our best to get you the best price and Butler trainer available for your needs.
Typically, the cost for a group per day is: £1000 but this can go down or up a little depending on the above criteria.
Our Butler corporate events are famous worldwide
The above price includes:
Standard curriculum/ Power point.
The above price does not include:
Transportation and accommodation for the trainer. Economy (or higher class) return flight and/or train journey, transfer plus hotel cost.
Handbooks for the students to keep.
Shirts for the students to wear
Certificates with frames
Where do the butler corporate events run:
We run the courses in London, UK. We also run the courses overseas. Our Butlers and Butlers trainer are used to travel across the globe to see to your needs.
Contact us to book your Butler Corporate Events today:
Give us a ring on +442032900142. You can also email us on  info@bespokebureau.com  to discuss options.
Butler corporate events with us are fun and a good way to bond
Kind Regards, The British Butler Academy & Bespoke Bureau
Blackwell House | Guildhall Yard
Bank | London | EC2V 5AE, UK
Phone: +44 (0) 2032900142
General household projects.
What is the Salary for an Executive Housekeeper?
The salary is based on the amount of experience. These women (or men) are seen as a real benefit for any household and they often get paid well. The salary also depends on the position and the duties and hours included in the job description. Executive Housekeepers typically earn between £35,000 and £60,000 plus benefits. Part-time typically earn between £20 – £30 per hour.
Contact us to recruit an Executive housekeeper:
Email  info@bespokebureau.com  about the various types of executive housekeepers we have.
You can find more information on our websites  www.bespokebureau.com  or contact the team:
Our owner and director
Are you looking to recruit housekeeper ?
Great housekeepers can be hard to find. To find a housekeeper of a top class, use a housekeeper recruitment agency like ours. They best housekeepers in London are very sought after and can be expensive. However, it is in our interest to keep the costs down for you.
How to recruit housekeeper with Be
spoke Bureau?
Its as easy as one two three. Register to recruit housekeeper with us and we will help you quickly. We will shortly send you the agency’s best available of 3-4 best available housekeepers looking for new positions.
What is a Housekeeper?
Housekeepers work in all types of homes. From casual houses to formal, multi-staffed homes. This position involves daily maintenance of the home. Sometimes also heavy cleaning. Housekeepers are usually supervised by the principals of the house.
A Housekeeper works either full-time or part-time. She/he works on a live-in or live-out basis. Housekeepers usually work alone. Sometimes they may work as a team with other housekeepers. Normally, a full-time Housekeeper is recommended for homes that are large. If errands, cooking, and laundry are also required, hiring 2 or more housekeepers is recommended.
Recruit housekeeper with us:
A housekeeper can make a difference to your life
If you recruit housekeeper with us, they will be very experienced. Some housekeepers also have formal  housekeeper training .  We can recruit housekeeper candidates with skills in laundry, ironing, and cooking.
What are the responsibilities of a Housekeeper?
Typical housekeeper duties may include the following:
• Cooking and serving meals for the household.
• Cleaning the interior of the home.
• Laundry and ironing linens.
• Assisting with the cooking and serving for special events.
• Running errands including the grocery shopping.
• Making the beds.
• Organizing drawers and straightening closets.
• Caring for household pets.
• Maintaining stock of routine cleaning and household supplies.
• Tending house plants.
What is the salary for a Housekeeper?
When you recruit housekeeper with us, you will pay the housekeeper about £10-15 per hour. Sometimes up to £20. The salary is based upon experience. Duties and the hours required to fulfil responsibilities are also considered.
Contact us to recruit housekeeper:
Email info@bespokebureau.com  about the various types of housekeepers in London that we have available now.
You can find more information on our websites www.bespokebureau.com or contact the team:
Sara Vestin Rahmani Head of Bespoke Bureau
Kind regards,
Cost of a mature nanny ?
Mature nannies sometimes charge more than other nannies. It’s important that you use a nanny agency in London such as the peekaboo mature nanny agency. It our interest to keep the prices of nannies down for you and your friends. This way you can get a good deal but also recommend our nanny placement services to your friends.
A daily mature nanny in London can cost from 400 to 600 pounds per week net approximately.
A live in mature nanny ranges from £250-500 net a week.
The rate depends on the hours, duties, amount of children and so on.
Sometimes a mature nanny in London costs less and sometimes more.
If you want your mature nanny to cook and clean then she will probably charge more
The more skills and experience you want, the more expensive it gets.
We also offer mature au pairs and mature mothers helps at our agency
Mature Maternity nurses are on standby for you too
If I find a  mature nanny  what duties can I expect to have performed?
A mature nanny is an experienced private childcare who cares for your children in your home.
Often she will have had her own children, and thus have a lifetime of experience.
Some mature nannies will also help around the house.
Most mature nannies can drive cars.
Mature nannies will usually be able to help you develop your children in a healthy manner.
A mature nanny should be able to cook basic nutritious meals.
Most mature nannies are happy to baby sit.
Some mature nannies live in.
Some mature nannies live out (daily nannies they are called).
Happy children
Find a mature nanny in London with us and we will offer you:
Affordable nanny agency fees.
Holiday mature nannies.
Mature nanny housekeepers.
The placement agency places nannies of all ranges. We offer all price levels in London and also outside. If you have a large household that needs to be fully staffed we can help further. You may wish to employ many nannies for your private home then we suggest you hire a head mature nanny first. She can then work with us and employ a number of junior or standard nannies for to back her up or cover when she is off.
We offer:
British nannies, Mandarin nannies, Swedish nannies, French nannies, Russian nannies, German nannies and much much more.
Whatever type of  mature nanny  you wish to find for children we can find. Give us a ring today on +442032900142 or email us on nannies@peekaboochildcare.com for a more in depth chat about the various types of Nannies in London that we have available now.
Holiday nannies
Experienced candidates.
The placement agency places nannies of all ranges and for all price levels in London and also outside. If you have a large household that needs to be fully staffed we can help further. You may wish to employ many nannies for your private home then we suggest you hire a head nanny first. She can then work with us and employ a number of junior or standard nannies for to back her up or cover when she is off.
We offer:
British nannies, Mandarin nannies, Swedish nannies, French nannies, Russian nannies, German nannies and much much more.
Whatever type of nanny you wish to find for children we can find. Give us a ring today on +442032900142 or email us on  nannies@peekaboochildcare.com  for a more in depth chat about the various types of Nannies in London that we have available now.
Maternity nurse agency – Only the best is good enough for you
Call +442032900142 for more info or email the best maternity nurse agency London on  info@peekaboochildcare.com   
The Maternity nurse agency – who are we?
The Bespoke Bureau’s well know sister agency Peekaboo Nannies and Maternity nurses is considered the  Maternity nurse agency .
We offer the most exclusive, personal and professional maternity nurse services in the UK.
If you are looking for a maternity nurse agency then look no further.
We have the best alternatives available.
We are a recognised and accredited learning centre for Maternity nurses.
We are the only agency in the UK that offers placements and training.
We have the best maternity nurses on the market.
The  Maternity nurse agency  will provide you with experienced and qualified maternity nurses.
We offer bilingual maternity nurses and place our maternity nurses globally.
 
Maternity nurse agency -why hire a maternity nurse?
There are many reasons why families decide that they need to hire a maternity nurse
A maternity nurse is a great help for a short (or long) period for the mum after giving birth.
She comes in to rescue you after you have had your baby and left the hospital.
Not only are you very tired but may feel unsure of how to handle the problems of a new baby.
The maternity nurse will give you the confidence to cope quickly.
She will give you a routine to follow to suit your family’s needs.
The main responsibilities of a private maternity nurse is to care for your baby and assist you.
The duties of a maternity nurse also involve supervising and tidying the baby’s room.
She will sometimes help with day-to-day laundry for the baby in addition.
If you are planning to breast feed then the maternity nurse will support and encourage you with this.
If you are going to bottle feed then the maternity nurse will be responsible for sterilising and making up the bottles for your baby.
The  Maternity nurse agency  works like this:
Our maternity nurses are on call for 24 hours a day either 5 or 6 days per week.
She is entitled to at least 2-3 hours free time during the day to rest or take a walk.
She however is on call should you need her assistance.
Her time off per week consists of one full day and one full night; during this time the maternity nurse can ask to sleep alone or take time off outside the home.
Peek-a-boo Maternity division offers junior maternity nurses and trainee maternity nurses at discounted prices for those happy to use a recently qualified maternity nurse from our MBA ( Maternity and Baby Academy )
Some maternity nurses will help you with nutrition advice and prepare balanced and healthy meals.
Whatever the reason or circumstance which leads to looking for a maternity nurse in London or elsewhere, rest assured that we will help. With the   Maternity nurse agency , your dream person can be found today.
The  Maternity nurse agency  – why us?
There are many nanny and maternity nurse agencies in London and the UK but make sure you pick one with a good reputation like us.
This will save time and money in the long run to be prepared.
We do the vetting for you.
We train the maternity nurses in house.
We know and trust our maternity nurses.
Our maternity nurses are fit and healthy.
Our maternity nurses care of twins and triplets.
We offer maternity nurses for all the world.
We offer long term maternity nurses and short term maternity nurses.
We offer an unrivalled back up guarantee to our clients where you can swap maternity nurse if you wish.
Affordable maternity nurse rates.
Contact the  Maternity nurse agency today
We look forward to helping you. Please be clear about your requirements or ask for help if not sure. We will help you get the right help for your needs.
Give us a ring today on +442032900142 or email us on  info@bespokebureau.com  for a more in depth chat about the various types of maternity nurses and other staff you can have from us   www.bespokebureau.com
Kind regards, Sara Vestin Rahmani and Team
The Bespoke Bureau, Peek-a-boo and Cupcakes
Blackwell House | Guildhall Yard
Bank | London | EC2V 5AE, UK
Phone: +44 (0) 2032900142
The Best Maternity nurse agency London  will provide you with experienced and qualified maternity nurses.
We offer bilingual maternity nurses.
We place our maternity nurses globally.
Best Maternity nurse agency London -why hire a maternity nurse?
There are many reasons why families decide that they need to hire a maternity nurse
A maternity nurse is a great help for a short (or long) period for the mum after giving birth.
She comes in to rescue you after you have had your baby and left the hospital.
Not only are you very tired but may feel unsure of how to handle the problems of a new baby.
The maternity nurse will give you the confidence to cope quickly.
She will give you a routine to follow to suit your family’s needs.
The main responsibilities of a private maternity nurse is to care for your baby and assist you.
The duties of a maternity nurse also involve supervising and tidying the baby’s room.
She will sometimes help with day-to-day laundry for the baby in addition.
If you are planning to breast feed then the maternity nurse will support and encourage you with this.
If you are going to bottle feed then the maternity nurse will be responsible for sterilising and making up the bottles for your baby.
The Best Maternity nurse agency London  London works like this:
Our maternity nurses are on call for 24 hours a day either 5 or 6 days per week.
She is entitled to at least 2-3 hours free time during the day to rest or take a walk.
She however is on call should you need her assistance.
Her time off per week consists of one full day and one full night; during this time the maternity nurse can ask to sleep alone or take time off outside the home.
Peek-a-boo Maternity division offers junior maternity nurses and trainee maternity nurses at discounted prices for those happy to use a recently qualified maternity nurse from our MBA ( Maternity and Baby Academy )
Some maternity nurses will help you with nutrition advice and prepare balanced and healthy meals.
Whatever the reason or circumstance which leads to looking for a maternity nurse in London or elsewhere, rest assured that we will help. With the  Best Maternity nurse agency London , your dream person can be found today.
Call +442032900142 for more info or email the  Best Nanny agency London  on  info@peekaboochildcare.com
Best Nanny agency London – who are we?
The Bespoke Bureau’s well know sister agency Peekaboo Nannies is considered to be The best Nanny agency London  and the UK.
We offer the most exclusive, personal and professional best nanny agency London service there is.
If you are looking for a nanny in agency or elsewhere then look no further.
We have the best British nannies, Swedish nannies , German nannies, Spanish nannies, French nannies and much more.
We place nannies and all other domestic staff in London, the countryside and the rest of the UK as well as in the south of France, Dubai and many other locations and countries.
Best Nanny agency London – why hire a nanny?
There are many reasons why families decide that they need to use the   Best Nanny agency London .
A nanny in London can make a big difference to those with busy lifestyles.
A nanny will pick your children up from school.
A nanny in London can sometimes drive.
A nanny  can help your children with their home work.
You can work and travel more freely without worrying about being home on time.
A nanny can baby sit.
A nanny can help you keep an organised home at al times.
A nanny can sometimes sort your laundry and ironing out.
A nanny can help develop your child in a healthy way.
A nanny will play and learn with your children.
A nanny is often able to cook balanced and healthy meals.
Whatever the reason or circumstance which leads to looking for a nanny in London, rest assured that we will help. With the   Best Nanny agency London , your dream nanny can be found today.
Best best nanny agency London – why us?
There are many nanny agencies in London and the UK but make sure you pick one with a good reputation like us.
This will save time and money in the long run to be prepared.
We do the vetting for you.
Our nannies all speak good English.
Our nannies are 18-60 years of age but usually 22-45.
Our nannies are fit and healthy.
We offer summer nannies.
Whatever your recruitments, the Best Nanny agency London  will sort you out.
Contact the best Nanny agency London today
We look forward to helping you. Please be clear about your requirements  or ask for help if not sure. We will help you get the right help for your home, estate, house or country mansion.
Give us a ring today on +442032900142 or email us on  info@bespokebureau.com  for a more in depth chat about the various types of nannies and other staff you can have from us   www.bespokebureau.com
Kind regards, Sara Vestin Rahmani and Team at Peek-a-boo and Bespoke
Blackwell House | Guildhall Yard
Bank | London | EC2V 5AE, UK
Phone: +44 (0) 2032900142
Background checks with the Butler company:
CRB checks on your request.
We will provide you with previous references.
We meet the candidates when able to.
Most butlers also train with us on our training academy.
Why we are considered the best butler company
All our butlers are recommended to us and never come to us via advertising.
Affordable Butler company Agency fees.
We offer an unrivalled 12 month placement guarantee. This gives you 12 month to make your mind up.
We will only source butlers with the best capabilities.
Our Butlers will care for your home with utmost care.
When you use our services, you can rest assured that the butler will take a genuine interest in your home and needs.
Our  Butler company  has been voted the best private service in the world.
Our Butler company has won awards.
All candidates have a lot of experience that will suit the role with you.
The Butlers we suggest to you, will have worked for similar households before.
We guarantee that recruitment service for butlers will only send you the best people on the market.
You can rest in the knowledge that your home will thrive when you hire a butler with us.
Contact us to book or for more info
Give us a ring on +442032900142. You can also email us on  info@bespokebureau.com  to discuss options. Our website is:  www.bespokebureau.com
Butler company -We have the best candidates on the market
Kind regards, Sara Vestin Rahmani and Team
The British Butler Academy, Bespoke Bureau, Peek-a-boo and Cupcakes
Blackwell House | Guildhall Yard
Bank | London | EC2V 5AE, UK
Phone: +44 (0) 2032900142
Do you want to hire Palace Manager ?
At Bespoke Bureau we have over 3000 experienced and qualified top Palace Managers available. Each Palace Manager has undergone a rigorous selection process. This is to ensure we only provide our clients with a trusted Palace Manager.
Hire Palace Manager for Your Palace or VIP home
We understand how important it is that the palace manager is the best in business. All our palace managers are recommended. We never come to us via advertising.
Hire Palace Manager- how we can help you:
We offer an unrivalled 12 month placement guarantee which gives you a chance to make your mind up.
Competitive Palace manager agency fees.
We will only  hire Palace Manager  candidates with the best capabilities.
Our Palace Managers will care for you palace with VIP skills.
Rest assured that they will take a genuine interest in your home and needs.
Our hire Palace Manager  service is known as the best in the world.
All candidates have a lot of experience for the role with you.
Our candidates at the hire Palace Manager  agency have worked for similar VIP or royal households.
We guarantee that recruitment service will only send you the best people on the market.
You can rest in the knowledge that your home will thrive when you hire with us.
Hire palace manager with Sara Vestin Rahmani and get your fleet of staff right
Contact us for the best  hire Palace Manager  service in the world
If you want to use our  hire Palace Manager  service, please register with us today.
Give us a ring on +442032900142. You can also email us on  info@bespokebureau.com  to discuss the types of staff you want.
Our website is:  www.bespokebureau.com
You can also read about our butler and house management training school on  www.britishbutleracademy.com . Feel free to also visit our youtube page for videos on the  Butler Agency & Academy .
 
How we can help you Hire Estate Manager for Saudi :
The are known to have the Best Estate Managers on the market.
We offer a 12 month placement guarantee that no other agencies in the world do.
We will hand pick our favourite Estate Manager candidates  for you.
We will work with you or your PA.
We will arrange for you to meet the Estate Manager for Saudi in your home, via skype, phone or at your work.
We can arrange a second interview.
We can arrange a trial.
We can arrange the travel and all the contracts.
We can help you assist to help you make an official offer through our Estate Manager for Saudi agency.
Our Estate Managers for Saudi are often also trained as British Butlers with us
Our Hire Estate Manager for Saudi Service-Why we are the best
We will only help you Find Estate Manager for Saudi who we the best in the industry.
We train Estate Managers at our British Butler Academy.
We do quality control if you want us to (we come to you for this).
When you Find Estate Manager for Saudi via us, you can rest assured you have the best money can buy.
Our Estate Managers  have previously worked for VIPs or royal households
All are very experienced.
Most are also qualified as Estate Managers.
We guarantee that our Estate Manager for Saudi hire service will only hire top Estate Managers. You can rest in the knowledge that your home will thrive in a positively when you hire Estate Manager for Saudi with us.
Contact us to hire Hire Estate Manager for Saudi
If you want our help then please contact us via the form or contact details below. We are quick and efficient. Welcome!
Hire estate manager for Saudi with Sara Vestin Rahmani and her team
Kind regards,
Sara Vestin Rahmani & The Elite Butler Team
Bespoke Bureau
How we can help you  hire Top butler :
We will hand pick our favourite Top butler candidates and email you or your PA
We will arrange for you to meet the Top butler in your home, via skype, phone or at your work
We can arrange a second interview.
We can arrange a trial with your favourite candidates
We will assist to help you make an official offer through our Top butler agency.
Our hire Top butler Hire Service-Why we are considered the best agency
Hire top butler-make your household stand out
We offer an unrivalled 12 month placement guarantee which gives you a chance to make your mind up and swap should you need to.
Competitive Butler agency fees
We will only help you Hire Top butler  who we are sure have the capabilities to effectively care for your home.
When you use our services, you can rest assured that they will take a genuine interest in your home and needs.
Our Top butler hire service ensures all registered candidates have a lot of experience to the role with you
Our Butlers have worked for similar VIP or royal households
Most our butlers are qualified with our butler school .
We guarantee that our Top butler hire service will only send you the best people on the market.
You can rest in the knowledge that your home will thrive when you hire a Top butler with us
If you want to use our  hire Top butler  service, please register with us today
Visit our youtube page for videos on the Butler Agency & Academy
Kind regards,
Sara Vestin Rahmani & The Elite Butler Team
Bespoke Bureau
Finishing School London – certification
Smiley graduates
The British Butler Academy’s Finishing school London is the leading internationally certified finishing school in Europe.  We offer quality controlled training t the finishing school
We are different at the Finishing school in London in that we:
Run courses all year around
Offer standard courses
travel to you if you wish
welcome you to our royal premises to learn
only hire trainers that are the most experienced in the industry to ensure you learn from the best
Finishing School London – Our famous location
We are based at the famed and Royal Quintessentially British Guildhall Yard in the city of London.  This unrivalled location allows our clients and students to experience London in a unique way, in a location where the grandeur all began.
