Moby Dick (1956) - IMDb
IMDb
There was an error trying to load your rating for this title.
Some parts of this page won't work property. Please reload or try later.
X Beta I'm Watching This!
Keep track of everything you watch; tell your friends.
Error
The sole survivor of a lost whaling ship relates the tale of his captain's self-destructive obsession to hunt the white whale, Moby Dick.
Director:
From $2.99 (SD) on Amazon Video
ON DISC
Famous Directors: From Sundance to Prominence
From Christopher Nolan to Quentin Tarantino and every Coen brother in between, many of today's most popular directors got their start at the Sundance Film Festival . Here's a list of some of the biggest names to go from Sundance to Hollywood prominence.
a list of 47 titles
created 29 Nov 2011
a list of 23 titles
created 15 Aug 2013
a list of 39 titles
created 29 May 2014
a list of 22 titles
created 28 Jun 2014
a list of 45 titles
created 1 week ago
Search for " Moby Dick " on Amazon.com
Connect with IMDb
Want to share IMDb's rating on your own site? Use the HTML below.
You must be a registered user to use the IMDb rating plugin.
5 wins & 4 nominations. See more awards  »
Photos
Moby Dick (TV Mini-Series 1998)
Adventure | Drama | Thriller
The sole survivor of a lost whaling ship relates the tale of his captain's self-destructive obsession to hunt the white whale, Moby Dick.
Stars: Henry Thomas,  Patrick Stewart,  Bruce Spence
Captain Ahab's descent into madness destroys everyone around him. This powerful character drew John Barrymore, Orson Wells and John Huston. This film has been called the best, most authentic version of Herman Melville's MOBY DICK.
Director: Paul Stanley
Moby Dick (TV Mini-Series 2011)
Adventure | Drama
The sole survivor of a lost whaling ship relates the tale of his captain's self-destructive obsession to hunt the white whale, Moby Dick.
Stars: William Hurt,  Ethan Hawke,  Charlie Cox
A modern adaptation of the classic novel of the captain of a high tech submarine and his obsessive quest to destroy the enormousprehistoric whale that maimed him.
Director: Trey Stokes
In this extremely loose adaptation of Melville's classic novel, Ahab is revealed initially not as a bitter and vengeful madman, but as a bit of a lovable scamp. Ashore in New Bedford, he ... See full summary  »
Director: Lloyd Bacon
The true story of the surviving sailors whose whaling ship was destroyed by a sperm whale.
Director: Christopher Rowley
Truncated adaptation of Stephen Crane's novel about a Civil War Union soldier who stuggles to find the courage to fight in the heat of battle.
Director: John Huston
A mysterious explosion occurs at the Balam Bridge in Seoul on November 20th, 1994. In front of hot-blooded local news reporter Lee Bang-Woo, Yoon Hyeok appears. Yoon Hyeok is from the same ... See full summary  »
Director: In-je Park
A marine and a nun form an unlikely friendship. The marine is shipwrecked on a Pacific island and the nun has been left behind there; they find comfort in one another as the two wait out the war.
Director: John Huston
Fictional account of French artist Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec.
Director: John Huston
A major heist goes off as planned, until bad luck and double crosses cause everything to unravel.
Director: John Huston
Edit
Storyline
This classic story by Herman Melville revolves around Captain Ahab and his obsession with a huge whale, Moby Dick. The whale caused the loss of Ahab's leg years before, leaving Ahab to stomp the boards of his ship on a peg leg. Ahab is so crazed by his desire to kill the whale, that he is prepared to sacrifice everything, including his life, the lives of his crew members, and even his ship to find and destroy his nemesis, Moby Dick. Written by E.W. DesMarais <jlongst@aol.com>
See All (49)  »
Taglines:
In all the world---in all the seas---in all adventure, there is no might like the might of [Moby Dick] See more  »
Genres:
3 October 1956 (Portugal) See more  »
Also Known As:
Herman Melville's Moby Dick See more  »
Filming Locations:
Did You Know?
Trivia
Orson Welles ' one-scene cameo helped to fund his stage production of the very same story. See more »
Goofs
Airplane contrails visible in the background when Starbuck plans to shoot Ahab. See more »
Quotes
We're All Bound To Go
(uncredited)
(United States) – See all my reviews
Very minor spoilers ahead.
John Huston did a fantastic job adapting Melville's masterpiece for film. Ray Bradbury did an excellent job adapting the dialogue and exposition from the novel for the film. he took giant and important chunks of essential dialogue, without needing to take up the extraneous scientific jargon or soliliqiues that are better suited for the printed page than the screen. He remains faithful to Melville's vision, and the important symbolism is there. It's a very difficult job, and Melville's novel is a very difficult book to adapt, but Bradbury, who apparently hadn't read the book before adapting it, did one hell of a job.
The actors are great, and it's a shame they didn't win any Oscars. Gregory Peck is excellent as the sullen, vengeance-driven Captain Aheab. He made the role his own, and knew when to be passionate and when to be calm and quiet. Some parts of the novel may seem wordy to viewers, but are important in conveying Melville's meaning, such as Father Mapple's sermon on man's obedience to God. If you have a short attention span, and only like action films that are short on substance, this movie is not for you. Everyone else must do themselves a favor and watch this classic. This is an adaptation for the ages.
7 of 8 people found this review helpful.  Was this review helpful to you?
Yes
