"A Beautiful Mind" - Jennifer Connelly - Pictures - CBS News
Next
Sundance Film Festival
Academy Award-winner Jennifer Connelly has fashioned a remarkable career playing women of resolve - survivors who surmount obstacles using much more than just the actress' ethereal beauty.
Pictured: Connelly poses for a portrait during the 2015 Sundance Film Festival, January 26, 2015 in Park City, Utah.
By CBSNews.com senior producer David Morgan
Credit: Larry Busacca/Getty Images
"Once Upon a Time in America"
Jennifer Connelly was born in upstate New York, and spent part of her childhood climbing trees in the little town of Woodstock.  "I was kind of a tomboy," she told CBS News' Tracy Smith.
Connelly started modeling in grade school, and that led to her being cast - at age 11 - in Sergio Leone's 1984 multi-generational mob epic, "Once Upon a Time in America."
Credit: Warner Brothers
"Once Upon a Time in America"
"There were so many first things," Connelly said of "Once Upon a Time in America." "It was my first time on a movie set. And it was my first time out of America -- we filmed in Italy. And it was my first kiss. I had to kiss this boy in the scene. And it's the most chaste thing you've ever seen, but I was just mortified that it was in a movie. The whole thing was larger than life, and magical, really magical."
Credit: Warner Brothers
"Once Upon a Time in America"
Jennifer Connelly as Young Deborah, an aspiring dancer, in Sergio Leone's "Once Upon a Time in America" (1984).
Credit: Warner Brothers
"Phenomena"
Jennifer Connelly played a young girl who has an eventful stay at an eerie Swiss school for girls that is rife with murder and supernatural portents, in Dario Argento's 1985 thriller, "Phenomena" (a.k.a. "Creepers").
Credit: New Line Cinema
Jennifer Connelly starred in the romantic teen comedy, "Seven Minutes in Heaven" (1985).
Credit: Warner Brothers
"Labyrinth"
In the Jim Henson fantasy "Labyrinth" (1986), Jennifer Connelly plays a young girl who enters into a bizarre fantasy land in order to rescue her kidnapped sibling.
Credit: TriStar Pictures
David Bowie as the Goblin King, with Jennifer Connelly, in "Labyrinth" (1986).
Credit: TriStar Pictures
"The Rocketeer"
Jennifer Connelly plays the girlfriend of stunt pilot Cliff Secord, whose jet pack earns him title billing as "The Rocketeer," in the 1991 film based on the superhero comic book.
Credit: Walt Disney Pictures
"Mulholland Falls"
In the 1996 crime thriller "Mulholland Falls," Jennifer Connelly plays a woman who crosses paths with the wrong people, including a friend (Andrew McCarthy) who shoots pornographic films.
Credit: MGM
"Inventing the Abbotts"
Joanna Going, Billy Crudup, Jennifer Connelly, Joaquin Phoenix and Liv Tyler in Pat O'Connor's coming-of-age drama, "Inventing the Abbotts" (1997).
Credit: 20th Century Fox
Jennifer Connelly in Alex Proyas' dystopian science fiction thriller,  "Dark City" (1998).
Credit: New Line Cinema
"Requiem for a Dream"
Jared Leto and Jennifer Connelly in Darren Aronofsky's psychological drama about drug addicts, "Requiem for a Dream" (2000). Connelly earned an Independent Spirit Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress.
Credit: Artisan Entertainment
"Pollock"
In Ed Harris' 2000 biopic "Pollock," Jennifer Connelly starred as Ruth Kligman, an artist who became the mistress of the abstract expressionist painter Jackson Pollock.
Credit: Sony Pictures Classics
"A Beautiful Mind"
In "A Beautiful Mind" (2001), Jennifer Connelly played the wife of the brilliant but tortured mathematician John Nash, played by Russell Crowe.
Credit: Universal Pictures
"A Beautiful Mind"
In "A Beautiful Mind" (2001), Jennifer Connelly starred as student Alicia Larde, who marries the brilliant but tortured mathematician John Nash.
Credit: Universal Pictures
"A Beautiful Mind"
In addition to a Golden Globe, Jennifer Connelly won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for "A Beautiful Mind," which also earned Oscar Best Best Picture, Best Director (Ron Howard), and Best Adapted Screenplay.
Credit: Universal Pictures
Vanity Fair Oscar Party
Actress Jennifer Connelly attends the Vanity Fair Oscar Party at Mortons on March 24, 2002 in West Hollywood, Calif.
Credit: Sebastian Artz/Getty Images
"Hulk"
Jennifer Connelly as biotech researcher Betty Ross, with Sam Elliott as her father, General Thunderbolt Ross, in Ang Lee's 2003 film of the comic book hero, "Hulk."
Credit: Universal Pictures
Golden Globe Awards
Actress Jennifer Connelly attends the 60th annual Golden Globe Awards at the Beverly Hilton Hotel on January 19, 2003 in Beverly Hills, California.
Credit: Jon Kopaloff/Getty Images
"House of Sand and Fog"
In "House of Sand and Fog" (2003), based on the novel by Andres Dubus III, Jennifer Connelly plays a recovering addict, recently evicted, who battles an Iranian immigrant (Ben Kinglsey) over ownership of her house.
Credit: Dreamworks
"House of Sand and Fog"
Jennifer Connelly in "House of Sand and Fog."
Credit: Dreamworks
Academy Awards
Actress Jennifer Connelly and her husband, actor Paul Bettany, attend the 75th annual Academy Awards at the Kodak Theater on March 23, 2003 in Hollywood, California.
The two, who had both appeared in "A Beautiful Mind" (but did not act together), met up again, and were married on New Year's Day 2003. They have two children together.
Credit: Kevin Winter/Getty Images
Los Angeles
Actress Jennifer Connelly attends the Los Angeles premiere of the film, "Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World," at the Samuel Goldwyn Theater November 11, 2003 in Los Angeles.
Credit: Frederick M. Brown/Getty Images
"Dark Water"
In "Dark Water" (2005), a remake of a Japanese horror film, Jennifer Connelly plays a mother in a nasty custody dispute, whose child becomes endangered in their sinister new apartment.
Credit: Touchstone Pictures
"Total Request Live"
Actor Jennifer Connolly makes an appearance on MTV's "Total Request Live" on July 7, 2005 in New York City.
Credit: Peter Kramer/Getty Images
"Little Children"
In "Little Children" (2006), from Tom Perrotta's novel, Jennifer Connelly plays a documentary filmmaker who suspects - not without reason - that her stay-at-home husband (Patrick Wilson) is having an affair with a neighbor (Kate Winslet).
Credit: New Line Cinema
Hollywood
Actress Jennifer Connelly arrives at the premiere of the film "Firewall," held at the Grauman's Chinese Theatre on February 2, 2006 in Hollywood, California.
Credit: Frederick M. Brown/Getty Images
"Blood Diamond"
Jennifer Connelly plays a journalist seeking information on the black market trade of blood diamonds in the 2006 drama, "Blood Diamond," starring Leonardo DiCaprio.
Credit: Warner Brothers
"Reservation Road"
Joaquin Phoenix and Jennifer Connelly play the parents of a child killed by a hit-and-run driver in "Reservation Road" (2007).
Credit: Focus Features
Costume Institute Benefit Gala
Actress Jennifer Connelly attends the Metropolitan Museum of Art Costume Institute Benefit Gala, "Poiret: King of Fashion," at the Metropolitan Museum of Art on May 7, 2007 in New York City.
Credit: Evan Agostini/Getty Images
"The Day the Earth Stood Still"
Jennifer Connelly plays an astrobiologist who is just one of the experts called upon to confront a mysterious alien visitor in the 2008 remake of "The Day the Earth Stood Still."
Credit: 20th Century Fox
"He's Just Not That Into You"
Jennifer Connelly and Bradley Cooper in the 2009 romantic comedy, "He's Just Not That Into You."
Credit: New Line Cinema
EIF Revlon Run/Walk For Women
Actors Jessica Biel, Jennifer Connelly, Jimmy Fallon and Jessica Alba help kick off the 12th Annual EIF Revlon Run/Walk For Women at Times Square on May 2, 2009 in New York City.
Credit: Michael Loccisano/Getty Images
"Creation"
In the 2009 film, "Creation," Paul Bettany stars as naturalist Charles Darwin, with Jennifer Connelly playing his wife, Emma.
Credit: Newmarket Films
Toronto International Film Festival
Actress Jennifer Connelly arrives at the Toronto International Film Festival opening night gala presentation of "Creation," at the Roy Thomson Hall on September 10, 2009 in Toronto, Canada.
Credit: Jason Merritt/Getty Images
"Virginia"
In "Virginia" (2010), written and directed by Dustin Lance Black ("Milk"), Jennifer Connelly plays a mentally unstable woman engaged in a long-term affair with a local lawman (Ed Harris).
Credit: Entertainment One
Cannes Film Festival
Actress Jennifer Connelly arrives at the 65th Cannes Film Festival on May 18, 2012 in Cannes.
Credit: VALERY HACHE/AFP/GettyImages
"Aloft"
Actors Jennifer Connelly, Cillian Murphy and Melanie Laurent attend the "Aloft" photocall during 64th Berlinale International Film Festival at Grand Hyatt Hotel on February 12, 2014 in Berlin, Germany.
Credit: Andreas Rentz/Getty Images
"Noah"
In Darren Aronofsky's epic "Noah" (2014), Jennifer Connelly reteamed with her "Beautiful Mind" costar, Russell Crowe, for a reimagining of the Biblical tale of the Great Flood.
Credit: Paramount Pictures
"Noah"
Actors Jennifer Connelly and Russell Crowe attend the New York premiere of "Noah" at the Ziegfeld Theatre on March 26, 2014 in New York City.
Credit: Jemal Countess/Getty Images
"Shelter"
In "Shelter" (2015), Jennifer Connelly plays a homeless heroin addict on the streets of New York City. The film was directed by her husband, Paul Bettany.
Credit: Bifrost Pictures
Toronto International Film Festival
Writer/director Paul Bettany and actress Jennifer Connelly speak onstage at the "Shelter" press conference during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival, September 12, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.
Credit: Jemal Countess/Getty Images
