Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street (2007) - IMDb
IMDb
There was an error trying to load your rating for this title.
Some parts of this page won't work property. Please reload or try later.
X Beta I'm Watching This!
Keep track of everything you watch; tell your friends.
Error
Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street ( 2007 )
R |
From $2.99 (SD) on Amazon Video
ON DISC
The infamous story of Benjamin Barker, AKA Sweeney Todd, who sets up a barber shop down in London which is the basis for a sinister partnership with his fellow tenant, Mrs. Lovett. Based on the hit Broadway musical.
Director:
a list of 36 titles
created 26 Nov 2010
a list of 24 titles
created 20 Nov 2012
a list of 21 titles
created 05 Aug 2014
a list of 33 titles
created 20 Mar 2015
a list of 24 titles
created 23 Sep 2015
Title: Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street (2007)
7.4/10
Want to share IMDb's rating on your own site? Use the HTML below.
You must be a registered user to use the IMDb rating plugin.
Won         1         Oscar. Another       33 wins & 72 nominations. See more awards  »
Videos
A gentle man, with scissors for hands, is brought into a new community after living in isolation.
Director: Tim Burton
Ichabod Crane is sent to Sleepy Hollow to investigate the decapitations of 3 people with the culprit being the legendary apparition, the Headless Horseman.
Director: Tim Burton
An imprisoned vampire, Barnabas Collins, is set free and returns to his ancestral home, where his dysfunctional descendants are in need of his protection.
Director: Tim Burton
A couple of recently deceased ghosts contract the services of a "bio-exorcist" in order to remove the obnoxious new owners of their house.
Director: Tim Burton
A frustrated son tries to determine the fact from fiction in his dying father's life.
Director: Tim Burton
Earth is invaded by Martians with unbeatable weapons and a cruel sense of humor.
Director: Tim Burton
Revolves around Frank, an American tourist visiting Italy to mend a broken heart. Elise is an extraordinary woman who deliberately crosses his path.
Director: Florian Henckel von Donnersmarck
Stars: Johnny Depp,  Angelina Jolie,  Paul Bettany
The Dark Knight of Gotham City begins his war on crime with his first major enemy being the clownishly homicidal Joker.
Director: Tim Burton
A writer is accused of plagiarism by a strange man, who then starts haunting him for "justice."
Director: David Koepp
In Victorian Era London, a troubled clairvoyant police detective investigates the murders by Jack The Ripper.
Directors: Albert Hughes, Allen Hughes
Stars: Johnny Depp,  Heather Graham,  Ian Holm
A vampire tells his epic life story: love, betrayal, loneliness, and hunger.
Director: Neil Jordan
An ambitious but troubled movie director tries his best to fulfill his dream, despite his lack of support.
Director: Tim Burton
Edit
Storyline
In the Victorian London, the barber Benjamin Barker is married to the gorgeous Lucy and they have a lovely child, Johanna. The beauty of Lucy attracts the attention of the corrupt Judge Turpin, who falsely accuses the barber of a crime that he did not commit and abuses Lucy later after gaining custody of her. After fifteen years in exile, Benjamin returns to London under the new identity of Sweeney Todd, seeking revenge against Turpin. He meets the widow Mrs. Lovett who is the owner of a meat pie shop who tells him that Lucy swallowed arsenic many years ago, and Turpin assigned himself tutor of Johanna. He opens a barber shop above her store, initiating a crime rampage against those who made him suffer and lose his beloved family. Written by Claudio Carvalho, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Never Forget. Never Forgive. See more  »
Genres:
Rated R for graphic bloody violence | See all certifications  »
Parents Guide:
21 December 2007 (USA) See more  »
Also Known As:
$13,635,390                (USA) (21 December 2007)
Gross:
Did You Know?
Trivia
As of March 2010, Helena Bonham Carter still had not seen the film because she does not like watching her own performances, although she had said she "will get round to watching it." See more »
Goofs
Johanna is seen packing stuff neatly into a suitcase , she puts the last item into her suitcase neatly , but when Judge Turpin opens her door we see the item hanging over the side as if it was hastily thrown in. See more »
Quotes
[first lines]
Anthony Hope : I have sailed the world, beheld its wonders, from the Dardanelles to the mountains of Peru. But there's no place like London.
Sweeney Todd : No, there's no place like London.
Anthony Hope : [spoken] Mr. Todd?
Sweeney Todd : You are young. Life has been kind to you. You will learn.
(Los Angeles, USA) – See all my reviews
As it happens more often than not, greatness is relegated to some obscure angle. In a year of brilliant opuses by the Cohen Brothers and PT Anderson, this Tim Burton film shines as the best from every angle. It's not just that Burton creates another superb, dark universe with Dante Ferretti's complicity or that Johnnt Deep breaks new ground, or that Helena Bonham Carter surprises us with a complex, marvelous realistic parody. The film touches visually a very private cord. Ed Wood managed that but Tim Burton with "Sweeny Todd" elevates it to the purest form of art. He will be punished for that, as Ed Wood was in its day. Disappointing grosses in a world that worship grosses will make it appear as a sort of a failure. My advise to you is run to see it wherever you can find it. Try to see it in a big screen with great sound. You will fly and dream and be taken away by the masterful hands of Tim Burton and the glorious faces of Johnny Depp and Helena Bonham Carter.
154 of 198 people found this review helpful.  Was this review helpful to you?
Yes
