Collecting Gone With the Wind by Mitchell, Margaret - First edition identification guide
Reviews (3)
Margaret Mitchell only published one complete novel, but it was quite the book - Gone With the Wind earned her the Pulitzer Prize in 1937 and National Book Award for 1936. The epic romance tale set in and around Atlanta, Georgia during the American Civil War has remained a bestseller, even before the equally popular film starring Clark Gable and Vivian Leigh was made in 1939.
First edition identification and notes
The first edition, first printing of GWTW numbered only 10,000 copies, and they bore an incorrect release date of May, 1936.  These inaccurate first printings, and corrected second printing of 25,000 copies, were both actually released to the American public in June 1936.  Signed first editions are valued from $10,000-$25,000, depending on the book's condition, of course.  The true firsts with the May 1936 date also have the original publisher's price of $3.00 and a "Spring Novels" advert with Gone With the Wind as the second title down as indicators of edition.  
Other collectible or notable editions
A Book Club Edition was printed and released at the same time as the first and second printings, which causes confusion for new collectors, but they remain one of the few Book Club Editions that still have some value. One indicator of the BCE is roman numerals for 1936 (MCMXXXVI) on the copyright page.There are also many who collect the movie-related books, posters, and ephemera.  The original, unsigned typescript for the film can be found for sale for around $15,000 (all prices as of November 2013). -
slimjackreelyahoocom : Gone with the Wind belongs to that finite group of books one can confidently call seminal.This novel traces, with heart wrenching passages and beautifully set scenes, the death of the "Old South". The horror and cruelty of war is adroitly used to contrast with the slow beauty of the South as it was, and which it can never be again. If a person has not read this book, their Education is incomplete.
AbbeyRheinhartt : I approached this book with trepidation. Would this be a book that glorified slavery and antebellum life? No, quite the contrary, although it provides rich description of the wealthy class before the Civil War.This book has an excellent story, well told, in which the characters are the symbols of their country. Scarlett is the United States, at first content and lazy with slavery, then hardened by war, and she shifts to be ruthlessly concerned with commerce and moving forward. Ashley is beautiful and pale, and represents the old south, which cannot adapt.You won't find better character development anywhere. This book is extremely well-written. Do yourself a favor and but a nice dusty one, so you can have that authentic feeling.This book is hugely feminist. It also tells a huge story, but is fast-paced, and will keep you locked in to the life of Scarlett.This is a significant book in American literature, but it is not dry. This book is a must-read.Abbey Rheinhartt.
JennyG (Draper): This is my favorite book of all time. The characters are incredibly well written, as is the story line. Highly recommend reading. The copy I got from Biblio.com was in great condition even though it was used. I definitely plan on buying from them again.
Review this book (Want a chance to win $50 ? Log-in or create an account first!) (You'll be automatically entered for a chance to win $50!)
