JK Rowling: life after Harry Potter - Telegraph
Book news
JK Rowling: life after Harry Potter
She was the first person to become a billionaire from writing novels. Since    the final Potter book came out in 2007, she has kept herself busy.
Harry Potter author JK Rowling, who turns 50 today Photo: AP
By Sarah Biddlecombe and Siobhan Palmer
3:30PM BST 31 Jul 2015
When the final Harry Potter book was released in 2007, many fans who had grown up with the young wizard were faced with a serious dilemma: devour the book quickly, and satisfy the craving to know what fate befell Harry and the rest of the wizarding community, or savour it, knowing that this was in all likelihood the last opportunity to read a Harry Potter book for the first time.
The books (which have sold over 450 million copies) and subsequent film adaptations became a big part of many children's lives, and the end of the franchise threatened to leave a gaping hole the hearts, and bookshelves, of fans.
Alan Rickman dies: British giant of stage and screen dies of cancer aged 69 - latest
However, the end of the series has marked neither the end of the story, nor the end of JK Rowling's time as a public figure and national treasure. From writing books for adults , to a variety of Harry Potter spin-off projects , we chart all the ways Rowling has been keeping the public on their toes for the past eight years.
2007: The Tales of Beedle The Bard
Just six months after the release of Harry Potter and The Deathly Hallows, Rowling published The Tales of Beedle The Bard, a short selection of nursery stories for young witches and wizards featured in the final Harry Potter instalment.
JK Rowling initially wrote and illustrated just seven handmade copies of book, which she produced as thank you gifts to six people who helped her during the 17 years she worked on Harry Potter. The seventh copy was sold at auction in Sotheby's in 2007 for £1.95m, the highest selling price in history for a modern manuscript, and all proceeds were donated to Lumos , Rowling's charity for children in institutions.
Fans were so disappointed the book was not available publicly that Rowling later agreed for it to be published worldwide, with proceeds again going to Lumos. It was a wise move: in its first week of publication, the book made £4.2m for the charity .
2011: Pottermore goes live
JK Rowling at the V&A Museum in 2011 for the announcement of 'Pottermore' (Photo: Paul Grover)
The same year that the final Harry Potter film came out, Rowling launched the interactive website Pottermore . The site offers Potter fans the opportunity to "explore more of the magical world of Harry Potter than ever before" with the chance to pick a wand, cast spells, brew potions and duel with other site members, all for free.
Rowling continues to revisit the wizarding world, periodically releasing new stories exclusively to the site, including a history of the Malfoy family, and details about Professor McGonagall's life pre-Hogwarts and the fictional company that makes Floo Powder (the magical substance that allows witches and wizards to travel between fireplaces).
In 2014, new writing from Rowling was released on Pottermore at 1pm every day from 12 to 23 December. This included a short story about the villainous Draco Malfoy, with Rowling admitting surprise at his admiring fanbase (the Facebook page Draco Malfoy Lovers currently has over 1,400 members). The author wrote on the site: "I have often had cause to remark on how unnerved I have been by the number of girls who fell for this particular fictional character... Draco was not concealing a heart of gold under all that sneering and prejudice."
2012: Rowling no longer a billionaire
JK Rowling gave an estimated 16 per cent of her fortune to charity in 2011 (REX)
Forbes dropped Rowling from its annual list of billionaires in 2012 as the author had given so much of her fortune to charity that she was no longer a dollar billionaire. The magazine claimed , "Rowling's estimated $160 million (£101 million) in charitable giving combined with Britain's high tax rates bumped the Harry Potter scribe from our list this year."
As well as her own charity Lumos , established in 2005, Rowling has a charitable trust, Volant , and has supported organisations including The Multiple Sclerosis Society Scotland , Comic Relief and Gingerbread .
2012: Rowling publishes a book for adults
Rowling parted ways with her literary agent of nearly 15 years when she published her first book for adults, The Casual Vacancy, on 27 September 2012. Telling the story of what happens when an unexpected death opens up a "casual vacancy" in a village parish council, Rowling's first post-Harry Potter novel received mixed reviews from literary critics although it still rocketed to the top of the UK's bestseller lists, selling 2.6m copies on pre-orders alone.
The book was made into a TV adaptation starring Keeley Hawes , Michael Gambon and Rory Kinnear, which aired on BBC One in February. Hawes told the Telegraph : “I couldn’t believe my luck when I was asked to play Samantha and I read the book. I read it on holiday and afterwards it was literally falling apart. She’s horrible. She’s brilliant."
2013: Robert Galbraith's debut novel is published
Rowling's first crime novel, The Cuckoo's Calling, was quietly published in April 2013 under the pseudonym of Robert Galbraith. The book was well received by critics and sold a respectable 1,500 copies in its first three months – until Rowling was revealed as the author on Twitter, propelling it from 5,076th place to the number one spot on Amazon and forcing the publisher to order an extra 300,000 copies to be printed to cope with the demand.
JK Rowling has so far written two novels under the pseudonym Robert Galbraith
Following the success of the book, Rowling swiftly published a second Cormoran Strike novel, The Silkworm, in June 2014 and has confirmed that a third novel is in the pipeline, which she says will be her "best planned" book to date. The Cuckoo's Calling will also be adapted for BBC One later this year.
2013: Harry Potter spin-off film announced
In September 2013, it was revealed that Rowling will make her screenwriting debut in a Harry Potter spin-off film, Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them . Inspired by a textbook which featured in the Harry Potter books and films, and was released as a short book in 2001 for Comic Relief, the film will tell the story of the textbook's author Newt Scamander, as he travels America in the 1920s and makes magizoological discoveries.
Eddie Redmayne will star as Scamander , and some cryptic tweeting from Rowling this year revealed that the film will contain information about an as yet unnamed American Wizarding School.
Earlier this month, more than 10,000 girls aged between eight and 12 attended open auditions in London for the part of Modesty, described as a "haunted young girl with an inner strength and stillness". Fantastic Beasts is set for release in November 2016.
Young girls queue up to audition for a role in Harry Potter spin-off Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them (Photo: John Nguyen)
2015: Very Good Lives
April saw Rowling publish a slightly different type of book. Her 2008 commencement speech at Harvard University (which you can watch below) was printed in an illustrated book called Very Good Lives: The Fringe Benefits of Failure and The Importance of Imagination. In her speech, Rowling drew on her own experiences (including going from a single mother struggling for money to a billionaire author) to offer advice to anyone at a turning point in their lives – something she is certainly qualified to do after turning Harry Potter into a multi-million pound empire, in spite of her original manuscript being rejected by 12 different publishers before it was bought by Bloomsbury for just £1,500.
Speaking about the upcoming book, Harvard President Drew Gilpin Faust said: “I have heard and read many commencement speeches, none more moving and memorable than J K Rowling’s. Years after her visit to Harvard, people still talk about it."
• Buy JK Rowling books from the Telegraph Bookshop
2015: Harry Potter show to hit the West End
In June, on the 18th anniversary of the publication of Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone in the UK, Rowling announced the title of the latest Harry Potter-related project on Twitter . Harry Potter and the Cursed Child, a play created by Rowling in collaboration with playwright Jack Thorne and director John Tiffany, will open in London in 2016. According to Rowling, the show will tell "an untold part of Harry's story". Contrary to some rumours, Rowling also confirmed that the show will not be a prequel.
I'm also very excited to confirm today that a new play called Harry Potter and the #CursedChild will be opening in London next year.
— J.K. Rowling (@jk_rowling) June 26, 2015
#CursedChild NOT a prequel. Lots of people asking, so I thought I'd say that again! NOT a prequel!
— J.K. Rowling (@jk_rowling) June 26, 2015
Tickets will go on sale this autumn, and the production will open at the Palace Theatre next summer. With fans on Twitter reacting with hysterical levels of excitement, J K Rowling sent a reassuring message to her collaborator Jack Thorne:
@jackthorne You know what? I don't think we needed to worry about filling the theatre. xxx
