Why is Las Vegas called "sin city?" (apartment, hotel) - Nevada (NV) -  City-Data Forum
Why is Las Vegas called "sin city?" (apartment, hotel)
User Name
Advanced Search
Go to Page...
Please register to participate in our discussions with 2 million other members - it's free and quick! Some forums can only be seen by registered members. After you create your account , you'll be able to customize options and access all our 15,000 new posts/day with fewer ads.
View detailed profile ( Advanced ) or search
site with
326 posts, read 251,616 times
Reputation: 52
Advertisements
I hear a lot about people calling Las Vegas "sin city." I wonder why that is?
 
Location: Somewhere along the path to where I'd like to be.
2,181 posts, read 4,540,824 times
Reputation: 809
Because some people consider gambling to be a sin.  Also, many people mistakenly think prostitution is legal in Vegas, but it's not really.
So because prostitution IS considered a sin, and because some people also think gambling is, you combine that with the general perception of "anything goes" in Las Vegas, and.....well, there ya' go.
 
12,578 posts, read 27,499,568 times
Reputation: 5152
Las Vegas has long allowed people to believe the Sin City image as a way to attract tourists. We never used to promote it ourselves, in fact we did just the opposite. Some were even defensive about it. But others gave us the title and we let them. On the other hand we have always felt a little guilty about what we do here and are quick to point out that we have more churches and schools per capita than any other city. While that used to be true, with all the uncontrolled rapid growth, I don't know if we've been able to keep that distinction. People around the country seem to believe that all the men here are mafia hit men, and all the women are prostitutes, and that we all live in hotel rooms on the Strip. The Las Vegas News Bureau, and the Chamber of Commerce, has always tried to help that image along making people feel that coming here is a little daring and sinful. Apparently it makes their vacation experience a little more fun. For us it's kind of ho hum. For several years, starting in the late 70s if I remember correctly, we tried to promote Vegas as a family vacation spot. It was estimated that the average visitor only loses a small amount per visit, so we needed lots of visitors to make any money. Now the ad men have decided that young, well healed people looking for "sin" are willing to risk more and the family thing didn't really work that well. So they have taken to promoting the "sin" image again, as in "What happens in Vegas stays in Vegas". Las Vegans tend to be jaded and look at people from elsewhere as naï¿½ve, which really, they are. They see gambling and think "how terrible...but, lets go do it, tee, hee." What they don't see is that being legal it's really no big deal. But illegal gambling goes on in a much bigger way than people imagine in every large city and small hamlet in America. In fact it's way bigger than legal gambling is.
 
1,607 posts, read 8,474,532 times
Reputation: 911
Because what happens in Vegas stays in Vegas.   :-)
The city prides itself on adults going there and "letting their hair down" to party, gamble, go to strip clubs, hire call girls to go your hotel room (even though they are wink wink illegal- yet the yellow pages is loaded with them, trust me those girls aren't all coming to dance!), see naked shows, etc.
Many people that visit Las Vegas plan to do things they can't or won't do in other places. Many of these things are often considered being morally wrong or against religious beliefs, thus the name sin city. And the city itself loves that name. They want people to go there with the idea they can do anything and everything and leave it all behind when they board the plane. That's why they have the kind of tacky and suggestive commercials and taglines promoting the city.
 
12,578 posts, read 27,499,568 times
Reputation: 5152
Sin City is mostly image. Nothing happens in Vegas that doesn't happen tenfold in other cities, but in other cities the hypocrites keep it locked in the closet. Who do you think are the ones doing these "sinful" things? People from other places. Don't think they aren't doing behind closed doors "back home" the things they can do in the open in Las Vegas. But the difference is that they come here and let their hair down, and as soon as they get home they talk about how sinful it is that their neighbor is committing some vice or other. In Las Vegas, nobody cares what the neighbors are doing. In little towns back east, the rumor mongers are always ruining people's lives. Here in Vegas nobody talks about anybody very much. What's the point? We just aren't hypocrites here. I could find a hooker in any town, of any size, in America, in about 20 minutes. The outcall services have driven our city fathers crazy for years, but there isn't much that can be done about them. Vegas is somewhat of an enigma at times. I've seen the city council get up in arms over suggestive billboards or when shows tried too go to far and show too much. Now you've got Bada Bings in every state. I once had neighbors that were Mormons. He was an LDS Bishop, and a craps dealer. She was a nude dancer in a show. They were engaged and lived in the same apartment, but he slept on the couch before they got married. I've known other nude dancers in shows like the Follies Bergere that were absolute prudes.
 
Quote:
Originally Posted by Buzz123
Sin City is mostly image. Nothing happens in Vegas that doesn't happen tenfold in other cities, but in other cities the hypocrites keep it locked in the closet. Who do you think are the ones doing these "sinful" things? People from other places. Don't think they aren't doing behind closed doors "back home" the things they can do in the open in Las Vegas. But the difference is that they come here and let their hair down, and as soon as they get home they talk about how sinful it is that their neighbor is committing some vice or other. .
I have to disagree. I think (and no many people who have) went to Vegas on vacation and thought it was a free for all. That they could behave differently there than at home. It was a way that they could let their hair down and party. I think a lot happens there that doesn't happen when people are at home. And I don't think a lot of them actually go home and talk about all the "sinful" things they did. They skip those parts and just say they gambled and saw some shows.
 
Location: Somewhere along the path to where I'd like to be.
2,181 posts, read 4,540,824 times
Reputation: 809
I was watching a documentary a couple of weeks back about Las Vegas, and it really helped me to see the city differently than what my impression of it had been.  I think the general public (outside the area) think of it as nothing more than a big playground where there really isn't any point in being there unless you want to gamble.  But they showed lots of churches, shopping, great shows and great recreational areas, and talked about how there's so much more to the area than simply the casinos.  What really impressed me was learning that all the money tossed into the fountains is donated to charities.  Seeing all those nice things, as well as the mountains out there, and learning about the climate, caused me to take a look at a place that I previously had never considered.
 
40 posts, read 181,651 times
Reputation: 36
at one time it really was "Sin City"....but the sin has slowly been taken out of it.. i think the only reason they keep whats left is because some stand to make a hefty profit ( after all morals only apply with something that can't turn a profit and promoted by those who don't stand to reap the rewards of the immoral unless the moral  itself can turn a profit)....  the new ad campaign of "what happens in vegas......" is a quick way for the unweary to get in trouble here...... there is also a saying " come here on vacation, leave on probation" which is more accurate..... fines and such are quickly becoming a secondary income for vegas........ there are even cops who sit on the overpasses looing in cars for drinkers I hear...... ya what happens in vegas...... but it could end up You staying in vegas longer than you planned......
Please register to post and access all features of our very popular forum. It is free and quick. Over $68,000 in prizes has already been given out to active posters on our forum. Additional giveaways are planned.
Detailed information about all U.S. cities, counties, and zip codes on our site: City-data.com .
Page 1 of 5
