The Cleveland Show | Family Guy Wiki | Fandom powered by Wikia
[ show ]
Plot
Many years ago, Cleveland Brown fell in love with the beautiful Donna. Unfortunately, Donna fell in love and married someone else. She promised Cleveland that if it didn't work out she would come to him. It didn't work out. Her man skipped town with another woman, leaving her with a teen daughter and a young son. Donna offers Cleveland a chance to win her over: by moving to the town of Stoolbend with son Cleveland, Jr. He now lives with a new step-daughter and step-son and rather strange neighbors, including a loudmouthed redneck couple, a married pair of anthropomorphic woodland bears, and a hipster wannabe.
Characters
Quagmire brings Loretta Brown 's body in " Gone with the Wind ".
In " You're the Best Man, Cleveland Brown ", Herbert makes a cameo at the beginning, and Peter and Quagmire make cameos at the end. Quagmire even congratulates Cleveland for making it through the whole season and asks Peter for his own show but Peter points out that Quagmire is a rapist.
Bruce made a cameo appearance in " Harder, Better, Faster, Browner ", and realizes he's in the living room of the wrong show.
Stewie appears in the beginning of "Cleveland LIVE!" during the "Great Moments in Animated TV History" narration. Peter and Lois are seen in the audience watching the performance.
In "It's the Great Pancake, Cleveland Brown" Cleveland Brown, Jr. flashes back to a Halloween in Quahog where he dressed as Al Sharpton, and took candy from Herbert 's house.
Herbert appeared in Cleveland Brown, Jr. 's suitcase in "Murray Christmas", while Peter, Joe and Quagmire participated in the Beer Walk in "Beer Walk!". On the night both episodes initially aired, the latter episode pre-empted Family Guy's 9 PM timeslot.
In "Ain't Nothing But Mutton Busting", stuffed Brian and Stewie toys are available at the fair, The booth runner calls Stewie "Stevie", and one of the sayings the Stewie toy has is an admittance that he's gay, a reference to Stewie's sexual confusion.
In "To Live and Die in Virginia", Lester asks Cleveland if he ever wondered what the world would be like without him. The theme sequence begins, but with Glenn Quagmire singing the theme song to his spinoff, effectively visualizing what Quagmire thought in "Family Goy".
In "BFFs", Peter comes to Stoolbend and Cleveland is upset that his best friend didn't call him to hang out. Several of the Family Guy characters make cameos, such as Loretta, Quagmire, and Brian and Stewie, who have lines in the episode, or are referenced, such as Meg and Bruce. The "Beer Walk" is also mentioned. In the end, Peter comes to Cleveland and his friends rescue with the help of the Evil Monkey .
In "Die Semi-Hard", Bruce and Consuela made cameo appearances. Also in this episode, an unnamed character believed to be Bruce's boyfriend Jeffrey .
In "A General Thanksgiving Episode", Herbert appears in the end of the song "I'm Paying a Young Boy for Sex".
One of the dogs Junior and Rallo catch in "Hustle 'N' Bros." resembles Brian Griffin although the dog tells them that they are not the same.
Consuela is featured in a mock commercial for NO perfume in "Wide World of Cleveland Show". Also, as Adolf Hitler , Cleveland discovers his writers are Jewish which he believes is why he ran a deli on Family Guy.
In "California Dreamin'", Cleveland is overjoyed when he thinks he gets to return to Family Guy.
Peter and Stewie appear as Pez dispensers that Robert Tubbs collects in "Wheel! Of! Family!".
The Cleveland Show crossovers on Family Guy
In " Jesus, Mary & Joseph ", Cleveland appears as one of The Three Wisemen .
Death stops by The Drunken Clam when Cleveland visits and tells him he's there to collect his show in " 3 Acts of God ". Cleveland protests that he is only visiting while on vacation.
Peter visits Cleveland in Virginia when he takes a whip from Quagmire's mail in " Herpe, the Love Sore ". Joe tries to warn him, but Cleveland can't resist the temptation when Peter announces a grape soda-gram.
A poster for The Cleveland Show appears during " Thank the Whites " in " Baby Got Black ". Also, Peter, Quagmire and Joe prank call Cleveland in Virgina and pretend to be Loretta, having faked her own death to fool the IRS.
The end of The Cleveland Show is acknowledged when Cleveland simply walks back into The Drunken Clam in " He's Bla-ack! " and opens himself up to the humiliation from his friends.
