Who is Governor Sarah Palin? And...Should Conservatives Rally Behind Governor Palin?
Who is Governor Sarah Palin?
And . . .       Should Conservatives Rally Behind Governor Palin?
Copyright         2008 by Lauretta Marigny - All         rights reserved
Where  has she lived?
Sarah (Heath) Palin was born in Idaho, but her family moved to Alaska when she was just a baby.
What is her Christian background?
Sarah Palin was baptized Catholic, but her parents changed churches. They joined an Assembly of God Church in Wasilla, AK. Sarah was baptized in the church when she was about  12.
She was the head of the Fellowship of Christian Athletes chapter at her high school.
She occasionally attends the Juneau Christian Center when she’s at the capital.
Someone said she would be the first Pentecostal in a presidential election.
What  is some information about her family?
Governor Palin’s parents are Charles and Sally Heath.
Sarah Palin and her husband, Todd, have 5 children. They have two sons: Track is 19 and Trig is 4 months old. Their three daughters are Bristol, Willow and Piper (ages 17, 14, and 7).
Todd Palin was asked by People Magazine how their children got their names. He responded,
“Sarah’s parents were coaches and the whole family was involved in track and I was an athlete in high school, so with our first-born, I was, like, ‘Track!’ Bristol is named after Bristol Bay. That’s where I grew up, that’s where we commercial fish. Willow is a community there in Alaska. And then Piper, you know, there’s just not too many Pipers out there and it’s a cool name. And Trig is a Norse name for ‘strength.’”(1)
Many wives of men in executive office are called “The First Lady.” Todd prefers to be known as the “First Dude.”
Do  any big names support the McCain/Palin ticket?
James Dobson sent a letter to Governor Palin commending her for bringing her youngest child to term, even though she knew it had Down Syndrome. After John McCain won the primary, James Dobson said he could not support him. However, after watching the Saddleback Civil Forum, Dr. Dobson said he liked what he heard from John McCain. Dr. Dobson was very pleased with John McCain’s choice of Governor Palin as VP. He said he would definitely support the Republican ticket. 
The National Right to Life endorses the McCain/Palin ticket as being very pro-life.
