Marcel Marceau and the end of mime - The Boston Globe
Already a subscriber? Members Sign In
Marcel Marceau and the end of mime
By Kevin Hartnett Globe Correspondent 
August 01, 2014
Wikimedia Commons
If you’ve heard of any mime artist at all, it’s almost certainly Marcel Marceau, the French actor who performed his character “Bip the Clown” all over the world from 1947 until his death in 2007. Earlier this month on The Paris Review’s website, novelist Mave Fellowes wrote a moving appreciation of Marceau that considered what it means for an art form to essentially be born and die with one person.
These days we only really encounter mime in street performances, but its roots are as a high art. Following World War II—during which Marceau was wanted by the Gestapo for helping Jewish youths forge identity cards—Marceau studied at the School of Dramatic Art in Paris under the demanding Etienne Decroux, the inventor of corporeal mime. Students learned 250 positions for the hand and spent three months learning how to walk in place. The goal, Fellowes wrote, was to depict “humanity in the abstract, like the statues of Rodin.”
Advertisement
But Marceau wanted to show people as they actually lived. To do that, he invented Bip the Clown, a character with a floppy top hat, eyebrows painted halfway up his forehead and, of course, a white face. Over the course of thousands of performances, Marceau mimed Bip “through every possible human scenario,” from marriage and death to train trips and encounters with butterflies.
In an interview, Fellowes—author of the novel “Chaplin & Company”—said Marceau was inspired by comic actors from the silent films he’d seen as a kid, men like Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton.
Get This Week in Opinion in your inbox:
Globe Opinion's must-reads, delivered to you every Sunday.
Sign Up
Thank you for signing up! Sign up for more newsletters here
“Bip was a little bit comic, a little bit hopeless, he was like the rest of us,” Fellowes said. “He was a much more accurate, less pretentious express of the human condition, and he made people laugh.”
Marceau was a global sensation, friends with Michael Jackson (whose moonwalk builds off of Marceau’s techniques), the only celebrity mime has ever produced.
We’re used to thinking of art forms as things that evolve, as each generation of artists learns from and responds to the one that came before them. But Fellowes says Marceau was the first and maybe last of his kind. This is partly because mime remains a hard art to figure and most young actors don’t hasten to learn it—“Somehow it’s less impressive or less accessible than circus or ballet,” Fellowes said—but also because after Marceau, there was nowhere left to go.
Advertisement
“I think he took his particular style -- he was the best at it there could ever be,” Fellowes said. “There was no room for further evolution, and no one has yet come up with another version of mime which is as appealing.”
Kevin Hartnett is a writer in South Carolina. He can be reached at kshartnett18@gmail.com .
Loading comments...
© 2017 Boston Globe Media Partners, LLC
You're reading  1 of 5 free articles.
Get UNLIMITED access for only 99¢ per week Subscribe Now >
You're reading1 of 5 free articles.Keep scrolling to see more articles recomended for you Subscribe now
We hope you've enjoyed your 5 free articles.
Continue reading by subscribing to Globe.com for just 99¢.
Special Offer for Business Travelers
Get the day’s top stories by 6 am. and breaking news as it unfolds
Connect with Facebook
Sign up & return to story
Please enter a valid email
Get Today’s Headlines every morning and breaking news as it unfolds.
Connect with Facebook
Sign up & return to story
Please enter a valid email
We hope you’ve enjoyed your
5 free articles
to Globe.com for just 99¢.
Subscribe Now
Already a subscriber? Log in
DON'T MISS THESE MUST READS
Get unlimited access and never miss a story
Alleged pattern of abuse emerges by TD Garden security guards
Girl Scouts face uproar over decision to march in Trump’s inaugural parade.
This is no time for Bruins to fire Claude Julien
Prosecutors can introduce cellphone evidence at Hernandez trial
We hope you've enjoyed your 5 free articles'
Continue reading by subscribing to BostonGlobe.com for just 99¢ .
Continue reading by subscribing to Globe.com for just $.99¢
Stay informed with unlimited access to Boston’s trusted news source.
High-quality journalism from the region’s largest newsroom
Convenient access across all of your devices
Today’s Headlines daily newsletter
Subscriber-only access to exclusive offers, events, contests, eBooks, and more
Less than 25¢ a week
GET FULL ACCESS NOW
Already a subscriber? Log in
Your city. Your stories. Your Globe.
Yours FREE for two weeks.
Enjoy free unlimited access to Globe.com for the next two weeks.
Limited time only - No credit card required!
Get Today's Headlines newsletter
Remember me
BostonGlobe.com complimentary digital access has been provided to you, without a subscription, for free starting today and ending in 14 days. After the free trial period, your free BostonGlobe.com digital access will stop immediately unless you sign up for BostonGlobe.com digital subscription. Current print and digital subscribers are not eligible for the free trial.
Thanks & Welcome to Globe.com
You now have unlimited access for the next two weeks.
Explore Globe.com
BostonGlobe.com complimentary digital access has been provided to you, without a subscription, for free starting today and ending in 14 days. After the free trial period, your free BostonGlobe.com digital access will stop immediately unless you sign up for BostonGlobe.com digital subscription. Current print and digital subscribers are not eligible for the free trial.
