Coimbra travel guide - Wikitravel
By train[ edit ]
All of the trains connecting Porto and Lisbon stop at Coimbra- B; about 1h00 from Porto and about 1h 45m from Lisbon . Long distance services only serve Coimbra B station (away from city center) but all tickets include a 5 min train ride to Coimbra A (center of Coimbra)"Baixa de Coimbra"{downtown}. Fast train only stop at Coimbra-B station, while Coimbra, or Coimbra-A is right in the city center. Train times (from any location) can be found on the National Rail - CP [4]
By car[ edit ]
The best way to drive to Coimbra is using the A1 Highway. Take any exit to Coimbra and you will be about 10 min away from the city center.
About 1 hour from Porto
About 2 hours from Lisbon
By bus[ edit ]
The bus station is located at Av. Fernão de Magalhães and is easily reached by local bus or on foot (a long walk{10 minutes} to city center). It has destinations for all of Portugal (with changes for some far away destinations), and it's faster and fares are normally cheaper than the train.
Coimbra is hard city to drive in as it was built around medieval structures. The best option for visiting Coimbra is to find a hotel with parking or to park near the city center and then walk around. The main attractions are in the city center and within walking distance of each other. Driving not advised in the city center, unless familiar. Also, parking is difficult. Coimbra Baixa is the lower{downtown}; Alta is the highest part of the city, also difficult to drive.
Get around[ edit ]
Most of the things to see and do in Coimbra, and most of the places to eat, drink and sleep are within reasonable walking distance of each other and of the rail station,in Baixa. There several hotels, residencials, pensions, restaurants, cafes, pastry shops, and nightclubs. Transit: buses, trolleys, electric cars. Most monuments are in Baixa and Santa Clara(across Mondego river). Smaller shops,restaurants,hotels,mostly in Baixa and Santa Clara. Major Shopping malls are in Alta,by Solum,near municipal staduim/pool.
Have a walk up to the top of University Hill from the Mondego river (one of the three great rivers of Portugal),a gorgeous view.
Monumental Serenade
Fado[ edit ]
There are two kinds of fado in Portugal: Fado from Lisbon and Fado from Coimbra, neither should be missed. [Fado,nostalgic songs accompanied by Portuguese guitar]
Coimbra Fado group Verdes Anos
Student life[ edit ]
There is always a lot going on in the student community, go and find out what's up. There are two student festivals held every year:
Festa das Latas
Get lost[ edit ]
The center of Coimbra is a great place to get lost, Coimbra is a small city but it is full of interesting spots. Museums(Machado de Castro),Torre d`Anto,etc.
The medieval center of Coimbra is unusual in retaining a number of independent bookshops, boutiques, toyshops, galleries, antique and foodshops.There are several bookstores,cafes,restaurants,esplanadas. In Alta/Olivais:
Coimbra Shopping
Budget[ edit ]
Three reasonably big shopping centers serve the standard fast food meals you can find everywhere.  They are located in key places in the city, but not necessarily close to the tourist attractions of the city.
Menu Verde, Rua de Olivença, 9,2.º-35L, inside the Galerias Topázio, Loja 3, go up to the 2nd floor, ☎ 239-840-207. Open Mon-Fri 9am-5pm. Delicious ovo-lacto vegetarian food. Inexpensive, 1.50 euros for soup and 5.50 a main dish (July 2012).   edit
Mid Range[ edit ]
Molho de Brocolos, Level 2, Galerias Avenida, Avenida Sa da Bandeira 33/35, Coimbra, Portugal (Around to the right and at the back of the 2nd floor of Galerias Avenida), [7] . Excellent certified organic vegan food at good prices. Location isn't great tucked away at the back of the 2nd floor of a slightly run-down shopping centre, but the food and the staff totally make up for it. €5-8 mains. (-8.423,40.212)  edit
Fangas Mercearia Bar, Rua Fernandes Tomas, 45-49 | 3000-168, Coimbra, Portugal, ☎ +351 93 409 36 36, [8] . Tue - Sun: 12:00-16:00 and 19:00-01:00. Small but very tasty dishes, rich in flavour mainly because they use local products, good vegetarian even vegan choice, nice selection of Portuguese wines, surprising(ly good) desserts. mid-range.   edit
Italia, the Italian restaurant in the city park and over the river, very close to the Santa Clara bridge (very popular with tourists). You have a lot of outside tables, if the weather permits, and the food is prepared by Italian cooks. It's not very expensive either.
Zé Manel dos Ossos Beco do Forno, 12, Coimbra 3000-192, Portugal, is one of the most famous restaurants in Coimbra, and for a good reason. A unique atmosphere inside the restaurant is responsible for this fame, but the food is good too. The walls of the restaurant are filled with small pieces of paper, with writings from clients. Be aware that it is quite a small space, so there's a big probability that you won't find a table. Inespensive with generous portions and a charcoal grill that makes a big difference compared with the electric ones generally spread.
Restaurante Vitória is in the city centre and has portuguese traditional dishes suchs as "cozido à portuguesa", "bacalhau assado na brasa", "chafana". It'a a nice and quiet restaurant.
Salão Brasil in the "baixinha" (downtown) center. A unique room, with huge windows and very spacious, invites for a relaxed meal. The food is great with some unique dishes from around the country - like "Vitela Maronesa" and "Secretos de Porco preto". Vegetarian meals.
During the weekends there is jazz, folk and fado concerts - most of them for free. It's great to finish your meal - you have plenty of time, Portuguese are always late - and get a concert right there. Sometimes they get very crowded.
Taberna. If you want to try 'chanfana', one of the most famous dishes of the region, you should definitely go to this restaurant, close to the football stadium. This restaurant is specialized in a limited amount of dishes, but the quality of the food is just amazing. Go there at night, and try the 'chanfana', even though you may not have a clue about what this is. This is the place for those who really appreciate good food. Don't go too late at night, because it can be a little crowded. The restaurant is very good, and it's located in the most densely populated area of the city.
La Botiga - Bistrô & Mercearia, Av Afonso Henriques 55 | 3000-011, Coimbra, Portugal, ☎ +351 91 415 34 11, [9] . Tue, Wen, Thur, Sun: 18:00-00:00 Fri and Sat 18:00-01:00. Signature portuguese tapas local products, good selection of Portuguese wines, great desserts. mid-range.   edit
Toscana is another very popular Italian restaurant, close to the new bridge. The decoration is great, with a lot of pictures from Florence, Venice, Rome. The quality of the food is quite high. It's definitely not your standard pizza...
O Telheiro, Rua do Padrao, Coimbra 3000, Portugal - this restaurant deserves a visit, it is unbelievable: lots of great food and cheap prices. On the down side it is very hard to get a table (but you will get one if you wait) and it is out of the center of Coimbra (aprox 5 mins from Coimbra B train station).
Wok - oriental cuisine of very good level on the opposite side of the river, between the new (Santa Isabel) and pedestrian (Pedro e Ines) briges.
Farinha de Milho in Anca, a beautiful restaurant in a beautiful setting with beautiful traditional Portuguese food. This restaurant is in an old water mill in a small village just 10 minutes drive from Coimbra.
Rua de Azeiteiras (a street in Baixa) has lots of nice traditional restaurants.
Splurge[ edit ]
Quinta das Lágrimas hotel's restaurant may be the best restaurant in the city. It's the most expensive place in the city though... Be sure to wear your best clothes if you go there. It's a very fancy place.
There is a lot of quality wine production in the regions surrounding Coimbra, try some "Bairrada" wine.
Don't miss the "licor beirao", a national sweet liquor drink born and made in the region.
Try the different varieties of firewater "Agua-Ardente".  One is made only from grapes while the other is made from mixed fruit.  Each have a unique and different after taste.
Cafes[ edit ]
Cafe de Santa Cruz is a historical cafe next to the "Igreja de Santa Cruz" (Saint Cross Church).
The bars in the new City Park are open all day long.
Night out[ edit ]
A warning, the students in this town seem to prefer Tuesday or Thursday night to go out.  On weekends, this city is sleepy as many students go home to their families.
a Capela bar, were you can find yourself surrounded by Portuguese guitar tunes and "Fado de Coimbra" get a grip of this so traditional local culture.
Diligencia Bar - The oldest Fado House in Coimbra. Typical night bar were you'll find Fado de Coimbra and all kind of portuguese tradicional music.
Salao Brazil - A restaurant but also a bar, most worthy during weekends, with - mostly - free jazz, folk and fado concerts.
Bar AAC - Academic Association Bar, entrance sometimes limited to University students.
The bars in the "Parque Verde do Mondego" are a good place to go for a drink during Spring and Summer.
The bars around the "Praca da Republica" are full of the spirit of the students of the University, mainly during weekdays in Autumn, Winter and Spring.
Bar Quebra Costas, R. Quebra Costas 45, 3000 Coimbra, Portugal. Nice location on the stairs leading to Se Velha. Open air concerts.
Budget[ edit ]
There are several cheap hostels around the city center.
Residencia Aeminium Coimbra, tel +351 239 829426 [10] . Great location near transportation and all main attractions. Good alternative to hotels or hostels with a good quality-price ratio.
Residencial Domus, rua Adelino Veiga 62, [11] . They have cheaper rooms in another building just opposite - a double costs 40 euros (Jan 2013).   edit
Grande Hostel de Coimbra, Rua Antero Quental nº196 (Near Praça da República (centre)), ☎ 00351 239 108 212, [12] . checkin: 12AM; checkout: 11AM. Hostel with lockers, free Internet, no curfew. Dorms €18 and double rooms 20 per person per night. It's a big house with a big garden and a nice and friendly atmosphere! There is a spacious living room, a well-equipped kitchen and a terrace for the guests to use.   edit
Mid-range[ edit ]
Almedina Apartment, Rua Fernandes Tomas, Coimbra 3000-167, ☎ 960371946, [13] . Just across the street from Fangas Mercearia Bar. Newly renovated duplex penthouse providing upmarket self-catering accommodation for up to six people.   edit
Coimbra Vintage Lofts, tel. +351 964326556, Coimbra Vintage Lofts . Apartments in Coimbra downtown, built into a renewed XVIII century building. Vintage décor.
Hotel Ibis Coimbra, Avenida Emidio Navarro n°70 Edificio Topazio, ☎ (+351)239 852 130, [14] . It's a modern looking hotel with amazing features.   edit
The Tryp Coimbra [15] Avenida Armando Gonsalves. [16]
Hotel Oslo Coimbra, tel +351 239829071. Hotel Oslo Coimbra Near the train station and all main attractions. It has recently been renewed, the staff are helpful and the view is nice.
Residencial Pensão Vitória,located near the train station. Recently renewed. Tel:+351239824049 , email: residencialvitoria@clix.pt, [17] . Excellent location, has good rooms with AC/good heating during the colder months. Very friendly staff. Superb kitchen.
Pousada de Condeixa-a-Nova - Santa Cristina, Charming Hotel, Rua Francisco Lemos 3150-142 Condeixa-a-Nova, ☎ +351-239 944 025 ( recepcao.stacristina@pousadas.pt , fax: +351-239 943 097), [18] . A former palace owned by the Almadas Family, was built in the 16th century. For several years it received members of the European nobility. In the first half of 19th century, the palace was transformed in an hotel inn, later on it was an orphanage to poor children and finally an asylum homeless elderly people.   edit
Splurge[ edit ]
Quinta das Lagrimas, tel +351 239802380. [19] The best and most expensive hotel in Coimbra. The hotel itself is an historical site.
Meliá Palácio da Lousã, tel +351 239990800. [20] Country's first boutique hotel. Located in Serra da Lousã.
Get out[ edit ]
Conimbriga, the largest Roman ruins in Portugal, about 15 km away,to the south.
Castle of Montemor-o-Velho, about 30km away. Have a cup of tea and don't forget tasting the local sweets: "espigas de Montemor", "pastéis de Tentúgal", "queijadas de Tentúgal" - mostly eggs and sugar in delicious and extremely-caloric combinations!
Figueira-da-Foz is about 40 km away. Beaches and casino.
Eat "Leitao" in Mealhada
