Tack Part 3 at Colorado State University - StudyBlue
StudyBlue
Size: 76 Views: 21
Martingales: Standing
A neck strap or yoke with a piece of leather that attaches to the girth at one end and the cavesson noseband on the other. There should be a rubber donut at the neck to stop the martingale from slipping in between the legs. The neck strap buckles on the left side of the horse.
Martingales: Running
This forms two branches with a ring on each end. The reins pass through the rings and buckle as normal.
Advertisement )
Martingales: Bib
Usually used in racing, it resembles a running martingale with a solid piece of leather between the branches. It keeps the horses from getting caught on the branches of the martingale.
Martingales: Irish
A short strap with a ring at either end. This martingale is worn under the neck. The reins are passed through the rings. The martingale prevents the reins from coming over the head. This martingale is usually seen only in racing.
Cruppers are used on mutton withered horses and very fat ponies to
keep the saddle from slipping forward over the withers
Girths
Should be even on both billets or girth straps. It should be attached on either the first and third or first and second billet straps.
Girth sores can result from
skin pinches under the girth, ill-fitting or poorly constructed girths, base wide conformation, friction from vigorous work or a poor grooming job in the girth area
A belly guard is
a special kind of girth used in the jumper ring to prevent a horse from abrading himself with caulks or studs
Halters, like bridles, should be
fitted to each individual horse
The crownpiece of a halter rests
behind the horse's ears
The crownpiece of the halter should not
fall down the horse's neck or slip forward over the ears
The halter noseband should fall
approximately 2 inches below the point of the cheekbone
Halters that rest too high on the face
make control difficult
Halters that fall too low may
risk damaging the nasal bones
Parts of saddle: Gullet
The channel that runs down the length of the underside of the saddle
Advertisement
The wide piece of leather where the rider's leg rest
Parts of saddle: Stirrup bar
The piece of metal that is riveted to the tree for the purpose of attaching the stirrup leathers
Parts of saddle: Skirt
The small flap of leather just below the pommel.
Parts of saddle: Tree
The structure on which the saddle is built
Parts of saddle: Panel
The under part of the saddle that sits on the horse's back
Parts of saddle: Pommel
The front arch of the saddle
Parts of saddle: Cantle
The back of the saddle
Parts of saddle: Seat
The place where the rider sits
Parts of saddle: Twist
The smallest part of the seat, where it meets the pommel
Parts of saddle: Knee roll
The extra padding on the front face of the flap
Parts of saddle: Blocks
The small pieces of leather under the knee roll or behind the rider's thigh to aid with stability when riding
Point pocket
The place where the tree inserts into the leather of the saddle
Pommel
a place where the saddle is causing pressure points on the horses back
A minimum of these should fit between the withers and the underside of the pommel
Three fingers (held sideways)
The saddle sits down on the withers
Too narrow saddle
The saddle presses into the back muscles and pinches the shoulders.
Poor saddle fit: Sore, pinches withers, which can be caused by
abrasion and compression
Poor saddle fit: Sever wither sores and fistulous withers, which can also come from
poorly cleaned tack or an unbalanced saddle, horse or rider
Poor saddle fit: Additional problems
Pressure points, back bruises, saddle sores, nerve damage
Poor saddle fit: Inhibiting the horse's
balance or movement
Poor saddle fit: Undesirable behavior, such as
bucking, rearing, bolting, balking and head tossing
Saddle sores can be caused by
Ill-fitting, improperly positioned or dirty tack
An unbalanced rider or saddle can cause
Saddle sores
Additional causes of saddle sores
Concussion, abrasion and compression
Saddle sores that are not properly cared for can develop into a serious condition called
fistulous withers
Fistulous withers causes
soft tissue to become inflamed and may lead to chronic infection. This infection can eventually invade the thoracic vertebrae.
Saddles are measured
from the middle of the cantle to the button over the point pocket
Stirrup leathers should be checked on a daily basis for
loose or rotted stitching
1 inch wider than the ball of your foot
Children generally use
Peaccock irons
Bridle parts: Crownpiece
Fits over the top of the head and serves as the attachment point for the cheek pieces and throatlatch
Bridle parts: Cheek pieces
Attachment to the crownpiece on one end and the bit on the other. The bit is usually attached by a stud that slots through a hole on the underside of the cheek piece.
When properly adjusted, cheek pieces should be
level with the horse's eye and have at least two holes above the buckle
Bridle parts: Browband
The strap that fits across the front of the horse's face directly below his ears.
Bridle parts: Noseband
Consists of a top strap that fits under the crownpiece on top of the horse's head and a band that goes around the horse's head in the area at the end of the nasal bone but above the cartilage.
Bridle parts: Throatlatch
A long thin strap on the crownpiece that buckles on the left side of the horse where the head and neck join.
What should be able to fit between the jaw and the throatlatch?
Four fingers or a fist
Bridle parts: Reins
Attach to the bit and are held by the rider
Bridle parts: Converters
An accessory to convert two rein bits such as pelhams and gags to a one rein bit
Standing martingale
