Flights from Moscow (MOW) to Kazan (KZN) on Orbitz.com
Flights from Moscow
Flights From Moscow
Moscow is the sixth most populous city in Europe with a population of over 11.5 million, and it is served by five airports: the Sheremetyevo International Airport, Bykovo Airport, Vnukovo International Airport, Ostafevo International Airport and Domodedovo International Airport. The airport used for most international flights from Moscow is the Domodedovo International Airport, located 26 miles from the city center, with the rest primarily handling domestic flights to other Russian destinations and flights to former Soviet states. International carriers operating from Domodedovo include Aeroflot, Air China, Korean Air, British Airways and Delta Airlines. Seats on many of the flights can be reserved online through Orbitz.com.
Parking at the Domodedovo International Airport
Short-term parking is available near the passenger terminal starting at $1.50 per hour. Long-term parking can be found at the long-term car park for around $18 a day.
Transportation to the Domodedovo Airport
Domodedovo Airport is linked to Moscow by a speedway, allowing quick transportation from the city to the airport by car, taxi or bus. The airport also operates the Aeroexpress railway service. The Aeroexpress train takes between 20 and 25 minutes to make the trip from Moscow to the airport at a cost of about $10. The express bus takes about 30 minutes but is less expensive at $3.00. Taxis can be booked anywhere in the city, with costs varying according to starting location.
A Meal Before Departing
A quick meal before departing from Moscow can be eaten at the low-cost fast food restaurants located within the airport. Kroshka-Kartoshka specializes in foil-wrapped baked potatoes with tasty fillings, while Sbarro offers dishes such as lasagna, calzone and stromboli. Indian dishes are available at the Paprika restaurant and Uzbek cuisine at Uzbechka. Several other restaurants are available as well, offering travelers a hearty meal before catching their flights from Moscow.
Flights to Kazan
Kazan International Airport
Use Orbitz.com when you need to book flights to Kazan, Russia. Kazan International Airport serves those who are flying into the city. It is located in Tatarstan, Russia, which is approximately 15 miles southeast of Kazan. This airport hosts many airlines, including Aeroflot, Air Arabia, Kuban Airlines, Turkish Airlines and Somon Air. Orbitz.com searches for discount tickets to Kazan from destinations throughout the world.
Ground Transportation in Kazan
Taxicabs are available at Kazan International Airport to take you to the city. Car rental agencies are also available at the airport, and you can book a rental vehicle in advance on Orbitz.com. The number 97 bus service links the airport with downtown Kazan. The fare for the 20-minute journey is 30 rubles.
Weather in Kazan
Like most cities in Russia, Kazan has humid, dry summers and long, cold winters. The warmest months of the year are June, July and August, with average high temperatures between 72 and 77 degrees Fahrenheit. The winter lasts from late September until March. It snows a lot during the winter, and below-zero temperatures are common.
Things to Do in Kazan
Kazan is known as the scientific center of Russia. It is home to the Tatarstan Academy of Sciences and the Kazan Science Center. Basket-hall, Cabinet of Ministers, Kazan Town Hall and Kazan Federal University are located in the city as well. Book your flights to Kazan on Orbitz.com to find the best deals on air tickets.
Map
More to explore for Moscow to Kazan
Explore Kazan with Orbitz's Travel Guides to find the best flights, cars, vacation packages and more!
