garboard - definition of garboard in English | Oxford Dictionaries
Definition of garboard in English:
garboard
(also garboard strake)
noun
The first range of planks or plates laid on a ship's bottom next to the keel.
Example sentences
‘The assembly of the garboards with the middle body of the keel is made by mortise-and-tenon joints.’
‘Traditionally, wooden boats had a bronze threaded plug in their garboard for just this reason.’
‘We expect that removal of the garboards and other planks will force replacement of at least some backbone components.’
‘They replaced the keelson and garboards, learning on the job; they sanded 18 layers of paint off the deck.’
‘After the new garboards are installed, we'll tighten or refasten all the copper nails.’
‘I have never had to employ oak garboards, but I would do it without hesitation should the need arise.’
‘Planks were usually screwed at the ends and, in some cases, the garboard strakes received similar treatment.’
‘The dark mahogany color of the garboards make for quite a contrast with the birch planks above.’
‘Sailboats are some times fitted with a garboard drain plug to serve the same function when wintering ashore.’
‘Assessment of her condition was completed when the garboards were removed to make all visible.’
‘I wonder if this is just the garboards or if the developments for the other plank are also incorrect.’
‘This tongue forms a very solid backing for the garboard strakes and is pierced with holes in pairs as shown from side to side.’
‘However, it is normal practice to caulk the garboard strake and the hood ends with cotton caulking, or oakum in heavier work, and seal it over with a filling compound.’
‘Here is a series of pictures of the process of gluing and screwing the garboard planks.’
‘After the garboards and inside keel are fiberglassed, the hull is ready for sanding, painting, and finish woodwork.’
‘When dry, the completed garboard was removed from the building frame and the scarphed joins sanded smooth.’
‘The rest of the hull is glassed with one layer and the bottom and garboards are further coated in epoxy and graphite.’
‘The elm used for the garboard was for greater rot resistance and the fact that elm is very tough wood.’
‘The second garboard was cut out using a router and a pattern-cutting bit using the first garboard as a pattern.’
‘This operation, if accurately performed, will give the exact shape of the lower edge of the garboard.’
Origin
Early 17th century: from Dutch gaarboord, perhaps from garen gather + boord board.
Pronunciation
Which of the following is correct?
I'm averse to the idea of marriage
I'm adverse to the idea of marriage
Which of the following is correct?
Are you adverse to exercise?
Are you averse to exercise?
Which of the following is correct?
Even small businesses are debt adverse
Even small businesses are debt averse
Which of the following is correct?
It's an option to which he's averse
It's an option to which he's adverse
Which of the following is correct?
She rejected the averse findings
She rejected the adverse findings
Which of the following is correct?
Conditions were averse at best
Conditions were adverse at best
Which of the following is correct?
This caused an averse cash-flow problem
This caused an adverse cash-flow problem
Which of the following is correct?
I'm not averse to discussing the matter
I'm not adverse to discussing the matter
Which of the following is correct?
Most men are conflict averse
Most men are conflict adverse
Which of the following is correct?
Climate change may be averse for us
Climate change may be adverse for us
You scored /10 practise again?
Retry
Most popular in the world
Australia
