Top 10 Largest Seas In The World
Home / Geography / Top 10 Largest Seas In The World
Top 10 Largest Seas In The World
By Naman Nepal on December 23, 2013
Pin It
In general, a sea is said to be an extended part of the saline water that is connected with at least one of the five oceans in the world, namely: Atlantic, Pacific, Indian, Arctic and the Southern Oceans. Many geographers regard sea as a small area of ocean that are bounded by land to a greater or a lesser degree. And based on these details, geographers divide sea into two different types: Marginal seas- partially enclosed by land, and Mediterranean sea- mostly enclosed by land.
With a total of 85 seas in the world, these water bodies in the ocean has been home to many marine life. With a total of 96.5% water and the remaining impurities, organic materials, salts and dissolved gases, the sea also has been the source to several minerals and salts that supply the basic needs of people all around the world.
Based on the area that the sea covers here we list the top 10 largest seas in the world. Scroll through the list!
10. The Bay of Bengal
The Bay of Bengal is the largest bay in the world and tenth on our list of top 10 largest seas in the world. Covering an area of 2,172,000 sq. km, this triangular shaped gulf forms the northeastern part of the Indian ocean. Bordering to India and Srilanka to the west, Myanmar and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands to the east and Bangladesh to the north, several rivers like the Holy Ganges, Hooghly, Padma, Brahmaputra and more flow into this sea. The Bay of Bengal also encloses some of the biggest ports in the world, namely Chennai in India and Chittagong in Bangladesh.
9. The Bering Sea
A marginal sea of the Pacific Ocean, the Bering Sea is separated by the Alaska Peninsula from the Gulf of Alaska. Covering an area of 2,291,900 sq. km, it was named after Vitus Bering who explored it in 1728 as the navigator sailed to the Arctic Ocean from the Pacific Ocean. It borders with Alaska on the east and north east, Kamchatka Peninsula and the Russia’s far east in the north, Alaska Peninsula on the South and the Bering Strait on the far north. With a good interaction in the weather, water currents and sea ice, this sea is a part of the productive ecosystem for a lot of marine life.
8. Tasman Sea
Also called as Te Tai-o-Rehua in Maori, the Tasman sea is a southwesterly marginal sea, a part of the South Pacific Ocean between Australia and New Zealand.  Covering a total area of around 2,330,000 sq. km, the sea was named after Abel Janszoon Tasman, a Dutch explorer. The Tasman sea was one of the major part of voyage of Captain James Cook in the 1770s. Several beautiful islands like the Norfolk Island and the Lord Howe Island are a part of this sea.
Prev1 of 4 Next
Naman is a digital marketer and a freelance blogger for hire who shares his knowledge about keyword research and SEO at BloggerMonk.com .
