Tanker leaks 6,000 tons of oil after running aground | The Independent
Tanker leaks 6,000 tons of oil after running aground
Friday 16 February 1996 00:02 BST
Click to follow
The Independent Online
A massive anti-pollution operation was under way last night after a 147,000- ton super tanker ran aground off Milford Haven, West Wales. Coastguards reported that 6,000 tons of oil leaked from the Sea Empress.
The crude oil leaked after some cargo tanks in the ship were holed, a Texaco oil company spokesman confirmed. "The port's full pollution control plan has been put into effect," he added.
Later the vessel was taken off the rocks and moved out to sea.
No injuries or fatalities had been reported among the 28-strong crew, all of whom were staying on board the vessel, said a coastguard spokesman.
The spokesman added that weather conditions were moderate, so the vessel was not thought to be in any danger.
The emergency began shortly after 8pm when the vessel, laden with North Sea crude oil, ran aground in Mill Bay close to St Ann's Head at the entrance of the Milford Haven estuary.
The giant ship was on its way to berth at the Texaco oil refinery further down the estuary to discharge its cargo.
Port officials said a pilot was on board when the ship grounded. One unconfirmed report said there had been a problem with its steering.
A large flotilla of specialist craft, some with floating booms, were immediately sent to the scene in an attempt to contain the oil spillage.
Two hours after the initial alert the Sea Empress had been refloated, said the Texaco spokesman. "The vessel is, however, remaining in position while experts discuss next moves in the operation," he added.
A Coastguard officer, George Crumpler, said: "It is a serious situation which will get worse before it gets better. There is a substantial-sized slick but so far the weather conditions are with us and it is being contained.
"The tanker crew is trying to transfer oil into tanks that are undamaged to prevent further spillage."
The bird sanctuary islands of Skomer and Skokholm are nearby, along with the beaches of the Pembrokeshire coastline. Environmentalists say a major oil spillage would put thousands of rare seabirds and seal colonies at risk.
As a safety measure coastguards banned all shipping from within a 10- mile radius of St Ann's Head. Lifeboats and an RAF helicopter were on alert at press time.
The 20-year-old ship is registered in Nassau in the Bahamas. It is a twin steam turbine vessel nearly 400 metres in length, has a maximum speed of 15.5 knots and can carry 140,000 tons of oil.
A Texaco emergency co- ordinator, Phil Thompson, said initial unconfirmed reports suggested a defect in the ship's steering system was to blame for the accident.
Mr Thompson added: "It is a 147,000-ton deadweight tanker and was actually carrying 128,000 tons of North Sea crude. It is not owned by Texaco - we are not sure who the owners are yet - but the oil was heading for a Texaco berth. Some of the tanks have been damaged and there has been a spillage of oil, though at this moment we don't know how much."
Aircraft fitted with specialist spraying equipment were expected to join the clean-up later.
More about:
