Amazon.com: Ben-Hur: A Tale Of The Christ: Ramon Novarro, Francis X. Bushman, Fred Niblo: Movies & TV
By CEN-SF on June 12, 2015
Format: DVD|Verified Purchase
“Ben Hur” the movie is everything you’ve heard: epic, massively entertaining, highly innovative, and an absolute must-see film.  This disc of “Ben Hur” is another matter altogether.  I focus here on the disc.
PLUSES:  It is the full-length film and, significantly, the Technicolor scenes are intact and in color.
MINUSES:  This disc is of Korean manufacture.  The disc itself was fine, but someone has inserted a bright blue logo on top of the black and white film; it persists throughout the credits, and bizarrely reappears for no apparent reason during one scene.  As the only color element in those sequences, it is distracting.  I have no idea whose logo it is.  Perhaps more significantly, there are visual artifacts during fast-action scenes.  These take the form of horizontal banding that looks like rasterization.  Whatever the cause, the defect looks digital, not optical.  And in a film whose glory lies in no small part on action scenes, this is a major flaw.
NITS:  On the case cover, the movie title is mistranslated as “Ben Hur: A Tales of Christ.”  No the cover doesn’t really hurt anything, and the titles within the movie are the original Hollywood slides, so they’re fine.  But for a full-price disc, this obvious error seems cheap.
ALTERNATIVES:  Amazon hypes this disc by saying “not available in the US.”  Not quite.  This silent version is included as an extra on the Blu-ray 4-disc boxed set of the 1959 remake, which is pricey.  I also have seen a regular DVD 4-disc set that includes the silent version in its extras as well, for a more reasonable cost.  (I do not think the silent version is included with the Blu-ray 2-disc set.)  I can’t speak personally to the quality of these transfers, but I have to imagine you’d at least not have the looming logo that’s present on the Korean disc.
THE BOTTOM LINE:  Magnificent movie, see it.  This is a very tatty disc for full price…hold out for a better version.
By Andre M. on December 2, 2016
Format: DVD|Verified Purchase
Those who may dislike silent films may change their minds after seeing this one.
This retelling of the classic novel is actually the second, not fist filmed version as commonly believed (the original was a crude early silent from 1907 that is of historical interest only). This version is a well told drama full of thrills and excitement about the Jewish wealthy heir who faces treachery from his childhood friend and forced into slavery. Much has been said about the story, but it is really well told here. Great acting, chariot races, ship battles, and even a few scenes in early technicolor. In some ways, it precedes KING OF KINGS two years later in 1927 with the color scenes, high production quality, and the Jesus Christ aspects. It is so exciting and well done that as is the case with KING OF KINGS, it may convert haters of silent cinema into fans of the genre.
By Louise Madeline on June 10, 2013
Format: DVD|Verified Purchase
Mesmerizing!  This may be a silent film, but as with all silent films there is an amazing quality that draws you deeper into the visual and dramatic spectacular of this tale.  If you're even the least religious or searching this film will definitely impact your life.  Not "true" black and white in that there is a sepia that lends a vintage look to the frames, which is not as drawing on the eyes.  The clarity of this film is unbelievably sharp.  It's as though it were made yesterday.  Very much worth purchasing.
By NHMovieLover on January 16, 2014
Format: DVD|Verified Purchase
I have always enjoyed the story of Ben Hur. I enjoy the Charlton Heston version and being a Ramon Navarro fan I wanted to take a chance and see how I would enjoy this silent. I have never been a fan of the Silent films but I have to say I really enjoyed this one. It was amazing to see what the fuss was about. This movie was amazing. It really pulled me in and I found myself really enjoying it. If you are a fan of silent Films or even Ramon Navarro, you may want to take a look at this gem. To think it will soon be 100 years old in 12 more years.
