Tate Gallery facts, information, pictures | Encyclopedia.com articles about Tate Gallery
The Oxford Companion to British History
© The Oxford Companion to British History 2002, originally published by Oxford University Press 2002.
Tate Gallery. During the 19th cent. British art was poorly represented in the national collections. The 1840s and 1850s saw a number of important bequests to the nation, including that of sculptor  Sir  Francis Chantrey , who left his fortune for the purchase of ‘Works of Fine Art … [by] artists resident in Great Britain ’, and the enormous Turner bequest, which the National Gallery was unable to house adequately. In 1890 the sugar magnate  Henry  Tate gave 60 modern English paintings to the National Gallery provided that a gallery was made available. The offer was twice withdrawn as arguments delayed the provision of a suitable site and funding for a new gallery. Eventually the government offered the prison site at Millbank, London, and the Tate Gallery opened in 1897.
Wealthy benefactors have continued to aid expansion; in 1987 the Turner bequest was finally housed as the artist intended, in the extension funded by the Clore Foundation. The Bankside power station was converted into the Tate Modern, opened in 2000, and the original gallery was renamed Tate Britain.
June  Cochrane
Pick a style below, and copy the text for your bibliography.
MLA
The Columbia Encyclopedia, 6th ed.
Copyright The Columbia University Press
Tate Gallery, London, originally the National Gallery of British Art. The original building (in Millbank on the former site of Millbank Prison), with a collection of 65 modern British paintings, was given by Sir Henry Tate and was opened in 1897. It was extended by another gift of Tate's in 1899, and in 1910 the Turner wing was completed, the gift of Sir Joseph Duveen. A gallery of modern foreign art was added in 1916, and three new galleries for foreign art and one for the works of John Singer Sargent were opened in 1926. The museum was damaged in World War II but reopened in 1949. In 1987 the Clore Gallery was opened to display the gallery's collection of J. M. W. Turner works, which is the most extensive in the world. Now renamed the Tate Britain, the complex is devoted to British art. The Tate Modern, Britain's first national modern-art museum in 100 years, opened in a large, refurbished power station on the south bank of the Thames in 2000.
See J. K. M. Rothenstein, The Tate Gallery (1958).
Cite this article
World Encyclopedia
© World Encyclopedia 2005, originally published by Oxford University Press 2005.
Tate Gallery UK national collection of modern art. The gallery's main building at Millbank opened in 1897. It started as a collection of British painting and sculpture, which now ranges from the mid-16th century to the present day. A large extension was added in 1979, and in 1987 the Clore Gallery opened, containing the Turner bequest. There are Tate Galleries in Liverpool and St Ives, Cornwall. The old Bankside Power Station houses the modern, international art collection. Called Tate Modern, it opened to popular acclaim in 2000.
http://www.tate.org.uk
