Mirror closes final salary pension plan to existing members  - Telegraph
Media
Mirror closes final salary pension plan to existing members
Newspaper group Trinity Mirror is to close its final salary scheme to its    existing members in a drastic move to cut costs.
By Edmund Conway
6:56PM GMT 08 Nov 2009
The company, which owns five national newspapers including the Mirror and Sunday Mirror, said the move was essential since the company's pension fund deficit had risen from £37m in 2001 to £275m last June.
The decision was announced late on Friday and will be implemented after a two-month consultation with staff. The company closed its final salary scheme to new members in 2002, but this was not enough to stem rising deficits at the fund due partly to falling share prices and partly to rising long term liabilities and increased longevity.
Among the plans to be closed is the Mirror Group fund, which was the victim of former proprietor Robert Maxwell's grab.
The scheme has 3,000 active members, and they will now be transferred to a defined-contributions scheme, in which their pension payout is related to the amount they put in, as opposed to a fixed amount related to their salary at the end of their careers. As such, pensions will invariably be less generous than under the previous system.
Paul Holleran of the National Union of Journalists said: "The scrapping of the final-salary scheme is the latest in a long line of attacks on staff at Trinity Mirror and serious questions need to be asked and answered about the capability of the senior Trinity
directors."
The group owns five national newspapers, more than 120 regional titles and over 400 digital products, but has struggled in the face of the recession and a sharp fall in advertising revenues.
The Daily Mail's owner Daily Mail and General Trust recently shut its own final salary scheme to new members, and the number of defined benefit schemes throughout the private sector is falling fast.
The pair are not the only newspaper groups to be struggling. The Observer – the Sunday newspaper owned by the Guardian Media Group – is set from next week to reduce the number of sections to only four. The Scott Trust, the charity that owns GMG, ruled out shutting the title and replacing it with a Guardian-branded edition.
Its staff will learn which magazines and sections – and how many full-time staff – will survive this week,
 
