Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street (Theatre) - TV Tropes
Fogg's Asylum, into which Johanna is imprisoned, is a perfect example of this.
There's also Lucy Barker, who was sent to the actual Bedlam House .
Big "NO!" :
Issued by Sweeney when Mrs. Lovett informs him of his wife's rape at the end of "Poor Thing."
And again at the end, when he realizes that the Beggar Woman whose throat he just slit was his wife.
Black Comedy : Despite its dark subject matter, the show is surprisingly funny, especially 'A Little Priest'.
Blackmail Backfire : When Pirelli recognizes Sweeney from the old days when he was Benjamin Barker, he tries to blackmail him, threatening to tell Beadle Bamford about him if he doesn't hand over half his earnings to him every week. This proves to be his biggest mistake.
Companion Cube : Sweeney's razors.
Come Out, Come Out, Wherever You Are : While searching for Toby in the sewers when he's figured out what's REALLY in the pies. "Tooooby...Where aaaare you..."
Contrived Proximity : We're sure that old beggar woman has no importance to the story whatsoever. She was hanging around her own old house and where her daughter lived. Still had some memories.
Cooking Duel : "The Contest"; shaving and tooth-pulling.
Counterpoint Duet : "My Friends", "A Little Priest", "God That's Good!" and "Final Scene" all count, while "Kiss Me/Ladies In Their Sensitivities" and the Act 2 reprise of "Johanna" are Counterpoint Quartets !
Crapsack World : With one or two possible exceptions, every character is either a complete sociopath or an Extreme Doormat .
Todd: In all of the whole human race, Mrs. Lovett, there are two kinds of men and only two/ There's the one staying put in his proper place / And the one with his foot in the other one's face!/ Look at me, Mrs. Lovett—look at you!
Crosscast Role : In the 2005 revival, Pirelli is played by a woman, but as a man.
Toby is also occasionally played by a woman.
Crowd Song : "Pirelli's Miracle Elixir". It slowly morphs into an Angry Mob Song when Todd and Lovett reveal Pirelli's scam.
Crusading Widower : Sweeney's motivation to kill comes from his dead wife and his daughter who, while not dead, is taken away from him.
Cycle of Revenge : Turpin and Bamford were responsible for the imprisonment of Sweeney, so he went on a quest to hunt them down. Then immediately after he finally achieved his vengeance, Sweeney finds out about Lovett's lies about his wife, whom he killed earlier, so he throws her in the oven, and then he himself is killed by Toby in the end for his own murder of Pirelli.
Damsel in Distress :
Subverted in the stage version. Although Johanna's character mostly fits the trope, in a memorable scene, Anthony rescues her from a madhouse where she is being imprisoned, pointing a gun at the asylum keeper. After Anthony admits he can't shoot, Johanna picks up the gun and kills the asylum keeper.
Played straighter in the film, in which neither Anthony nor Johanna shoots the asylum keeper—they leave him to be torn apart by the abused inmates.
Dangerously Close Shave : 'Nuff said.
Dark Reprise : All over the place, although special mention goes to "Final Scene", which features reprises of "Poor Thing", "A Little Priest", a snippet of "By the Sea" and ends with "A Barber and His Wife", each one being darker than the original version.
Furthermore, when Todd and Mrs. Lovett are chasing Toby through the sewers, she sings a few haunting lines from "Not While I'm Around".
"You will be guaranteed, without a penny's charge...the closest shave you will ever know."
"We'll serve anyone...meaning anyone...and to anyone..."
Downer Ending : By the end, the only cast members alive are Toby, Johanna and Anthony. Johanna and Anthony still have nowhere to go and the guards are likely to take them in for questioning. Toby is completely mad and just committed murder so he's probably heading to prison or the madhouse.
The Dragon : The Beadle fills this role for Judge Turpin.
Driven to Suicide : Lucy poisoned herself, according to Mrs. Lovett. Except she never said that she died... Some productions may have Sweeney fill this trope after he realizes he killed his wife. Though arguably it'd be assisted suicide. Take the concert production, Sweeney unbuttons his collar so Toby can slit his throat easier.
Drumroll Please : Toby does this himself while presenting "Pirelli's Miracle Elixir".
Due to the Dead : Sweeney and Mrs. Lovett engage in the evil version of this.
Evil Versus Evil : A Straw Nihilist Serial Killer with a razor who has his victims baked into pies with the help of a ruthless Yandere Stepford Smiler , against a Hanging Judge Pervert whose backstory includes raping the serial killer's wife , and whose introduction is a Kick the Dog —he has the title character transported for life so that he could have his wife for himself. His "best friend" sees nothing wrong with any of this and is quite content to help him seduce the daughter, who the judge has adopted as his own .
Even Evil Has Standards : Sweeney slits people's throats with a straight razor and has the bodies baked into pies, but he won't kill men who have families, which is understandable, since the reason for his Roaring Rampage of Revenge is that he was unjustly taken away from his wife and daughter, who were then raped/ Driven to Suicide (well, not exactly) and adopted/implied to be sexually abused by Judge Turpin, respectively. Though it may be more Pragmatic Villainy , families mean witnesses and investigations. The latter explains why it's Played for Laughs in the stage version. In some productions, he does give a customer's daughter a small treat.
Exact Words : Mrs. Lovett, when Sweeney discovers Lucy was still alive the whole time.
Sweeney: You lied to me!
Mrs. Lovett: No. No, not lied at all— no, I never lied! Said she took the poison— she did— never said that she died-
False Dichotomy : Todd, when he goes insane in "Epiphany" and figures why "we all deserve to die": any person who is happy is a wicked wrongdoer so killing them is a service to the community; and to any other person "death will be a relief".
Fauxreigner : Adolfo Pirelli a.k.a. Daniel O'Higgins, and he's Irish.
A Fï¿½te Worse Than Death : The masked ball in "Poor Thing", which culminates in Judge Turpin raping Sweeney Todd's wife.
Foreshadowing : And lots of it.
Why doesn't Mrs. Lovett want the Beggar Woman near Sweeney? She's Lucy.
When the Beggar Woman first meets Sweeney, she sings "Hey—don't I know you, mister?" As mentioned above, the Beggar Woman is Lucy, his supposedly dead wife—despite being driven insane, she still remembered her husband.
The bird seller talking about how they make the birds sing. "We blinds 'em. That's what we always does. We blinds 'em and, not knowing night from day, they sing and they sing without stopping. Pretty creatures." This was later echoed by Fogg, talking about Johanna. "She needs so much correction! She sings day and night and leaves the other inmates sleepless!"
Fractured Fairy Tale : Everything about Johanna's situation seems to be taken from a fairy tale, Rapunzel and Allerleirauh, in particular. Most of the main characters seem to be based on fairy tale archetypes (Mrs. Lovett is the deceitful witch, Anthony is the optimistic commoner, Johanna is the princess in distress, Toby is the orphan, and Turpin is the Devil).
Framing Device : In the revival, the events of the play are shown as being the story Toby tells in the insane asylum.
He Who Fights Monsters : Sweeney becomes worse than the monsters after "Epiphany".
High-Pressure Blood : Depending on the production. Can also be done on-stage, but it's very tricky.
Human Resources : The two main characters use human flesh in decidedly resourceful ways.
Hurricane of Puns : The wickedly funny string of allusions to personalities and flavors in the number "A Little Priest"
, where the two figure out how they'll dispose of the body upstairs (and make a tidy profit out of future customers, at the expense of the rival pie shop across the way).
(after tasting a pie made of a priest) HEAVENLY!
Hypocritical Humor : "Wouldn't do in my shop/why the thought's enough to make you sick/and I'm telling you them pussycats is quick!"
Irony :
Johanna is the only member of her family who goes to an insane asylum , but she's also the only member of her family who hasn't gone insane. This really depends on how she's played—sometimes she's already insane, and sometimes she only goes insane after she's put in the insane asylum. The lyrics in "Kiss Me" imply that she is at least very unstable. "It was a gate, it's the gate... —We don't have a gate!"
In pursuit of vengeance for his wife, and wanting his daughter back, Sweeney winds up murdering his wife and almost kills his daughter, who's in disguise.
Lucy wound up in Bedlam instead of a hospital, so technically Johanna isn't the only one of the family to end up in a nut-house.
All three of the Barkers end up in their old room together and none of them are aware that the others are there.
Anthony is a sailor who is both young and claims to have "[Sailed] the wold and seen its wonders" yet he's a romantic idealist. He doesn't even quite grasp the magnitude of Johanna's home life situation. Johanna, on the other hand, is a beautiful sixteen-year-old girl raised in wealth and she's extremely nervous and a bit cynical, admitting that she was afraid that Anthony wouldn't come back for her.
"I Want" Song : Mrs. Lovett's "By The Sea" song, all about the future she's hoping for.
Jumping Off the Slippery Slope : Sweeney himself.
Kangaroo Court : Judge Turpin's trial of Benjamin Barker is anything but fair.
Karmic Death : Sweeney Todd delivers one to Judge Turpin out of vengeance and later suffers another himself by irony. Likewise, Mrs. Lovett is baked to death inside her own oven.
Kick the Dog : Judge Turpin and the Beadle are dog-kicking machines. Senseless acts of evil include:
The imprisonment of Benjamin Barker on a false charge, sending him to a prison colony for many years (Judge Turpin)
Raping Lucy Barker and thus driving her mad (Judge Turpin)
Snapping the neck of the bird that Anthony had bought for Johanna (the Beadle)
Throwing Johanna into Fogg's Asylum for defying Turpin (Judge Turpin)
Pirelli's brutal treatment of poor Toby also qualifies as a Kick the Dog moment.
Kick the Son of a Bitch : Sweeney begins his transition into a Serial Killer by killing Pirelli, a con artist who attempts to blackmail him.
Kill 'em All : Were you expecting a revenge tragedy to have a happy ending? Sweeney Todd, Judge Turpin, Lucy, and Mrs. Lovett are all dead. Only Toby, Johanna, and Anthony are all alive. The police burst into the bakehouse just after Toby has slit Sweeney's throat, and is deliriously repeating Mrs. Lovett's secret of how to make the pies juicy and tender. "Three times, that's the secret.. three times through the grinder." This suggests that Toby is on his way to a Bedlam House . Anthony and Johanna are also there with the police, Johanna presumably having gone to them about the fact that Todd nearly killed her. Presumably they get a happy ending given that the Judge and Beadle aren't around to have Johanna re-committed, but it's still pretty gruesome...
Kill the Ones You Love : Sweeney kills the beggar woman, unaware that she is actually his wife Lucy.
Killed Offstage : Beadle Bamford is unceremoniously murdered out of sight, although the reveal of his body serves a narrative purpose by pushing poor Toby—who was already beginning to realize the secret of the meat pies—over the edge into full-on madness.
Lady Macbeth : Mrs. Lovett is arguably more evil than Sweeney Todd. Given that while he has the excuse of having endured terrible tragedy and going crazy, she participates in and encourages his mass-murdering for financial motives, and it was her suggestion to cook the corpses of his victims in the first place.
Then, there's Mrs. Lovett's ulterior motive in not telling Sweeney that his wife is alive and is the crazy Beggar Woman; she lets him think his wife is dead because of her crush on Sweeney.
"If you get my drift..."
"No?" ... "AH!" "Good, you got it."
In "A Little Priest", the actor always arrives overdone...
Pirelli.
George He- excuse me, GEORGE HEARN!!!
And when paired with Patti LuPone, it gets taken to new levels, very effectively.
People who saw Angela Lansbury early in her Broadway run and then later on, around the time of the recorded production, generally say that she was playing a couple jokes much bigger as the show's run went on.
During A Little Priest, if Sweeney and Lovett aren't completely tearing the house down, they're doing it wrong.
Jack Eric Williams, who played Beadle Bamford in the original cast, is quite a ham himself. "GLAD AS ALWAYS TO OBLIGE MY FRRRIENDS AND NEIGHBORS!"
Least Rhymable Word : "Locksmith."
Leitmotif : In many of her appearances, the Beggar Woman sings a fast-paced, discordant jig: "How'd you like a little muff, dear? A little jig-jig? A little bounce around the bush?" We hear the same music, played much more slowly and beautifully (to the point of being almost unrecognizable—that's deliberate), at the beginning of the Judge's costume party in flashback, where Lucy ends up raped. The music thus becomes a Chekhov's Gun : presumably, this was one of the last things Lucy heard before she went mad, and it now repeatedly runs through her head as she wanders the streets of London.
There is also the underscoring when Todd sings "and my Lucy lies in ashes" is also played when he kills the Beggar Woman. There's also the Beggar Woman's "Alms, Alms!" is a repeated motif—"The Ballad of Sweeney Todd" is reprise and entertained within many songs—honestly, it would probably be faster to list what isn't a motif.
Lethal Chef : Subverted ï¿½ Mrs. Lovett is this before she starts making pies of human flesh; she says because she couldn't afford fresh meat. She's not alone; she snaps that her rival, Mrs. Moony, uses the neighbors' cats for filling. Afterward, in the wake of financial success, Mrs. Lovett's meat pies are delicious (if now lethal in a rather different way), implying that she's actually a good cook, she just needs better ingredients.
Like Mother, Like Daughter: A blink-and-you'll-miss-it example, but at the beginning of "Kiss Me," Johanna's first idea of how to avoid marrying Turpin is to poison herself: "I'll swallow poison on Sunday/That's what I'll do, I'll get some lye..."
Lyrical Dissonance :
"A Little Priest"
Also Mrs. Lovett's verse in "Not While I'm Around"; she repeats Toby's protests of love and loyalty, but the creepy, wheedling violin solo underneath makes them sound totally insincere.
"Johanna (Reprise)".
Made from Real Girl Scouts : "Or we have some shepherd's pie, peppered with actual shepherd on top."
Mad Love : Depending on the version, Mrs. Lovett's one-sided obsession with Sweeney can be seen as an example of this trope, particularly considering her attempts to keep him from discovering that his wife is still alive.
Madness Mantra :
The old woman Lucy spouts these: "Beadle deedle deedle deedle deedle deedle deedle dumpling!" "Mischief! Mischief!"
Also Toby at the end of the stage show. "Three times, that's the secret, three times through the grinder."
Manipulative Bastard :
Mrs. Lovett, you're a bloody wonder.
Also Todd's scheme in Act II, where he helps Anthony to rescue Johanna by setting him up as a wigmaker's apprentice and betrays Anthony to the Judge in order to lure the latter back to his parlour. In particular, the song "The Letter" shows Todd agonizing over the exact words that will manipulate the Judge's lust and sense of inadequacy.
Meaningful Echo : During "Poor Thing", a flashback shows Lucy opening up the window curtains in Sweeney's barbershop. During Act II, the Beggar Woman opens up the curtains in the exact same fashion.
Meaningful Name : "Tod(d)" is German for "death."
The optimistic young sailor, Anthony Hope.
Perhaps unintentional: the name "Sweeney" is an anglicized version of the name Suibne, a (legendary) mad king of Ireland.
Tobias Ragg. A 'Ragg' is something used for the basest tasks, which was how Pirelli treated him.
And again in the same song!
Meaning no offense, it
Ladies in their sensit-
-ivities, my Lord
Moment Killer : Anthony walks into the barbershop for one of his trademark interruptions right after Mrs. Lovett suggests to Sweeney that they can "have a life together."
Mood Whiplash : After the terrifying Epiphany in which Sweeney goes off the deep end comes the hilarious Hurricane of Puns that is A Little Priest.
Motive Decay :
Sweeney quickly goes from desiring only revenge on the Judge and Beadle responsible for his imprisonment and stealing his wife and daughter to a vendetta against all humanity. However, given that in the original Victorian "shilling shocker", Sweeney had no motivation for his crimes, this is undoubtedly an improvement.
There's even a song that illustrates it: his part in the Johanna Quartet.
Todd's Motive Decay is a fully-fledged part of his character arc ; come The Reveal at the very end, Todd realizes what a monster he has become in allowing his lust for revenge and violence to consume him.
Never Trust a Trailer : This commercial
, featuring George Hearn and Angela Lansbury, doesn't seem to showcase any of the dark material of the show (although you might catch a hint at the end). In fact, if you were to watch it without having any knowledge of Sweeney Todd, you might even think that it's a pretty normal, happy story.
THIS commercial
, on the other hand, sums up the darkness factor in 30 seconds.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero! : Nice job busting into Sweeney's barber shop in the middle of his shaving of Turpin so that your plans to rescue Johanna gets blown to hell, Anthony!
Not to mention that you ruining Todd's plans for vengeance has caused him to lapse into a downward spiral of mass murder and unwitting (for the customers of the pie shop, anyway) cannibalism! Well done!
Pet the Dog :
Lovett taking in Toby. She's using him for labor, but she feeds him and knits him a muffler.
Lovett speculates that the Judge adopting Johanna must means that he did have enough of a conscience to save her. Productions that feature "Mea Culpa" suggest that she may be a just a little bit right about the Judge's sincerity.
Poorly Timed Confession : Just as Sweeney is about to kill Judge Turpin, Anthony bursts in and blurts out the fact that Johanna (the Judge's ward, who he intends to marry and is insanely possessive of) has agreed to elope with him. Cue a massive Oh Crap! moment. Not only does it foil Anthony's own rescue mission, it also robs Sweeney of his chance to revenge himself on the Judge, tipping him into a Heroic B.S.O.D. .
Pre-Asskicking / Pre-Mortem One-Liner : "BENJAMIN BARKER!!!"
Pre-Insanity Reveal : the homeless madwoman that hangs around the barber shop is revealed to be Sweeney's long-lost wife, Lucy. Unfortunately, this isn't revealed—either to Sweeney or the audience—until after he murders her.
Psycho Supporter : Mrs. Lovett's support of Sweeney's murder sprees and her eagerness to get rid of the corpses in such a disturbed manner make her a prime example of this trope.
Rape as Drama : Lucy Barker. Johanna, maybe. Threat of rape, almost certainly.
Reassigned to Antarctica : The judge sends Benjamin off to Botany Bay on a false charge so that he could get at his wife Lucy.
Red Herring : In the song "Kiss Me," Johanna makes a big fuss about her reticule (small purse), saying she cannot possibly leave it behind, it's the only thing her mother gave her ... quite a bit of set-up. The reticule is never mentioned again.
Reduced to Ratburgers : In the time that the play is set in, there is a meat shortage in London, such that those without means often have to turn to other avenues to get their meat, such as catching animals off the streets to be made into pies. It is this situation which leads to Mrs. Lovett's idea to serve up Sweeney's victims as meat pies. After all...
Sweeney: These are desperate times, Mrs. Lovett, and desperate measures are called for.
Reprise Medley : Many reprises are intertwined in the show, but notable examples are:
City On Fire: The main song is taken from the Beggar Woman's solo in "Johanna (Quartet)", Johanna sings a snatch of "Kiss Me", and Mrs. Lovett sings part of "Not While I'm Around".
Judge's Return: the music when Sweeney kills the Beggar Woman is taken from "Epiphany", the Judge and Sweeney reprise "Pretty Women", and then Sweeney reprises "My Friends".
Final Scene: Sweeney sings a line from "No Place Like London" with underscoring again from "Epiphany" while Mrs. Lovett reprises "Poor Thing". They then reprise "A Little Priest" and Mrs. Lovett sings "By The Sea". Finally, Sweeney sings "A Barber and His Wife".
Retirony : Arguably, "By the Sea."
Revenge : Sweeney Todd is done in the style of a classical revenge tragedy.
Roaring Rampage of Revenge : The entire show is one for Sweeney.
Rule of Threes : There are three songs called "Johanna", one of them sung by Anthony, the second by Judge Turpin, and the last as a quartet led by Sweeney. The second is cut from some productions, despite it being the Judge's big moment.
Also, Mrs. Lovett's instructions for making the meat pies:
"Three times... that's the secret... three times through the grinder..."
Say My Name : BENJAMIN BARKER!
Scare Chord : SWING YOUR RAZOR WIDE, SWEENEY! HOLD IT TO THE SKY! The first two verses were sung with only the singer illuminated. During the music between the second verse and the above line, the entire stage was dark and the entire cast assembled in ranks. The line starts; cue every spotlight in the house going on and Scare Chord . Truly amazing.
The shrill factory whistle that accompanies Sweeney's murders.
Another, more dramatic example plays in the final scene, when Sweeney sees the face of the beggar woman he has just murdered, and recognises her as his wife, Lucy.
Scenery Porn :
The stage version generally has to use a double-level set and depending on the available resources it can get more elaborate from there. On the other hand, John Doyle's 2004 staging in London (later transferred to Broadway) was a minimalist version that had only 10 actors who played instruments when they were not singing themselves, and only suggested its settings.
Also, the concert version performed in New York and San Francisco had no sets whatsoever, the actors performed on platforms surrounded by the orchestra.
The Secret of Long Pork Pies : The bodies are used to make Mrs. Lovett's meat pies, initially just for body disposal but often it then turns out that this just increases the flavor.
Sentenced to Down Under : Sweeney being handed this punishment kicks off the plot.
Stalker with a Crush :
Anthony, to Johanna.
If Mrs. Lovett is played as having waited specifically for Todd to return a single man, then this certainly applies.
Stalking Is Love : Anthony's infatuation with Johanna and Mrs. Lovett's obsession with Sweeney Todd can both come across like this. Judge Turpin appears this way at first, but this is horribly subverted when a few minutes later it's revealed that he rapes Lucy after seemingly attempting to court her.
Straw Nihilist : In the songs "Epiphany" and "A Little Priest", Sweeney justifies his actions based upon the utter corruption of the world. He even states that all Humans Are Bastards who deserve to die.
There's a hole in the world, like a great black pit,
And it's filled with people who are filled with shit
And the vermin of the world inhabit it...
But not for long!
They all deserve to die!
Stepford Smiler : Mrs. Lovett is an example of the facade being the true personality with a bit of Yandere thrown in, always almost always cheerful and kindly, but having no qualms about chopping up and cooking Todd's victims, motivated by obsessive love for Sweeney Todd and a desire to improve her economic standing.
