Charles Darwin's country home: Down House
Flows Uphill
1986
An excerpt from my book, A Brain for All Seasons:  Human Evolution and Abrupt Climate Change which  involves paleoanthropology, paleoclimate, and considerations from neurobiology  and evolutionary biology.  University of Chicago Press (2002); won the Phi  Beta Kappa book prize for science as literature.
I'm starting this little tour at Darwin's home, sitting at a park bench   under a magnificent oak tree that dates back to Darwin's time here. Five years   after returning from the voyage of the Beagle, Charles Darwin and his   young family moved from central London to a pleasant country home about 16   miles to the southeast, near the village of Downe. He lived here forty years   until his death in 1882. No more voyages around the world, not even trips to   the Continent, but Darwin had correspondents everywhere, and sometimes they   showed up at his door. 
And it was here at Down House that he raised pigeons, studied earthworms,   and dissected barnacles. Here he sat, pen in hand, and wrote out his books   that provided so much of our modern understanding of how nature came to be the   way it is. But only ten years ago, a scientific pilgrimage to Darwin's country   home was remarkably difficult, unless you got directions from someone who had   been here before. Only the most detailed guidebooks had a mention of Down   House, and then only in the fine print. Get off the train from London at   Bromley South or Orpington, and the taxi driver, upon learning your   destination, would knowingly suggest that there were much finer country homes   to visit than Down House - clearly not understanding that it was Charles   Darwin that made Down House so important, not its gardens. 
Arrive, pay off your I-told-you-so taxi driver, and you'd find a low budget   operation financed over the decades by the London surgeons, with only several   rooms restored to what they were like in Darwin's day, back before the place   had been turned into a girls boarding school in the early 20th century. There   were a few rooms filled with old-fashioned museum cases laden with a dozen   coats of paint, but most of the house was in sad need of repairs and   unsuitable for visitors. And this for one of the great scientists of all time,   not just one of England's greats. 
Still, it was enormously inspiring to anyone who understood the   intellectual triumph of Charles Darwin, this chance to see where he had   thought it all through - his study with his microscope, his chair by the   living room fireplace, and his "sand walk" out back, where he went   for three walks a day to digest his thoughts. Often, one supposes, Darwin   sloughed through the fine English rain, likely blowing in from the west after   forming above the warm Gulf Stream. 
Most people who think a little about evolution are wedded to the basic idea   of gradual improvements in efficiency - and not much concerned with the   origins of what was later improved (it was just "mutations"). Yet it   was Darwin himself (a point omitted from even the modernized science exhibits   at Down House) who first cautioned readers about getting fixated on   efficiency, and who - at the same time - offered a route for invention. He   noted that changes in function could be "so important," that an   anatomical structure improved for one function could, in passing, serve some   other function that utilized the same anatomical feature. (Darwin's example   was the fish's swim bladder serving as a primitive lung.) Novelties come from   those nascent secondary uses, not from a bolt out of the blue, as a cosmic ray   mutates a gene.
IF YOU HAVEN'T SEEN DOWN HOUSE since the reopening in 1998, there's a lot   more to see, thanks to much fund-raising by the British Museum. It is   currently operated by English Heritage, which issues timed tickets (phone   ahead) and provides audio wands to guide you through the rooms. 
Next to Darwin's study, there's his billiard room, where cause and effect   operated on a simpler, more direct, level than it does in biology. Across the   hall is the large dining room with its bay windows; it was also the "justice room" where Darwin served as a magistrate on occasion. The   now-rebuilt stairway to the upstairs leads you to a series of former bedrooms,   filled with modern exhibits about Darwin's science. 
Darwin traveled into London for scientific meetings, but mostly he kept up   an enormous correspondence. His was something like the modern "home   office" style of working, that computers and communications are making   possible even for scientists without inherited wealth. Darwin's life shows you   another style of doing science, one without classes to teach or students to   supervise, without grant applications to write, one where piecing together the   big story operated alongside the careful dissection of barnacles, digesting it   all on yet another loop around the Sand Walk, carrying a great stick which he   struck loudly against the ground, making a rhythmical click as he walked along   with a swinging gait.
More at the book's web site.
The TV series on Evolution ,   all eight hours of it, originally aired on PBS in 2001.  I was one of the dozen   science advisors for the series, especially the sixth program, "The   Mind's Big Bang."  Science   teachers should sign up for the instructor's manual.
 
Travel Directions
By Train and Bus: From London's Victoria Station, buy a day return ticket for Orpington; trains are frequent.  At Orpington, walk southwest several  miles or take the once-an-hour R8 bus from the train station, which goes directly past Down House.
If getting off at Bromley, take Bus 146 to Downe (except on Sundays).  Down House is about a five minute walk up Luxted Road from the village.  A cab from Bromley was ï¿½9 each way in 1996.
 
Bus map (now outdated, doesn't show R8 from Orpington,      but good road map)
 
 
Driving Directions:  Take the A21 toward Bromley and Orpington; Down House is signposted at Farnborough, also on the A233 near Biggin Hill.  Good maps at www.streetmap.co.uk or www.multimap.co.uk which use Ordnance Survey mapping; the latter also provides aerial photographs.
