Introduction,  "PRESUMED GUILTY"
Next | ToC | Prev
Introduction
      On January 22, 1964, the members of the then two-month old  Warren Commission were hastily assembled for a top-secret meeting.  Half-way into their executive session, the  Commissioners decided their words were so sensitive that they should not be recorded.  Commission member Allen  Dulles, the former CIA director, even suggested "this  record ought to be destroyed."  The incomplete stenographer's tape remained locked in government vaults for eleven years until, under pressure from a persistent researcher named Harold Weisberg, the National Archives retrieved it and forwarded it to the Pentagon for transcription.  The result was a blow to anyone who ever entertained the belief that  the Warren Commission set out in good faith to investigate the murder of President Kennedy and discover the full truth.
      It was never a secret that the Commission relied almost entirely on the FBI to conduct the bulk of its  investigation.  In its own Report, the Commission boasted of this relationship:  "Because of the diligence, cooperation, and facilities of the Federal investigative agencies, it was unnecessary for the Commission to employ investigators other than the members of the Commission's legal staff" (Rxiii).  It was also no secret that this relationship was inherently compromising because the investigative agencies, particularly the FBI, had a vested interest in the  conclusion that the President's murder was the unforeseeable act of a lone madman.  In the aftermath of the assassination, the FBI was left holding the bag.  Rumors immediately spread that Oswald had been an FBI informant  and that the FBI knew of Oswald's potential for violence  but failed to report his identity to the Secret Service.  As  Harold Weisberg succinctly put it as early as 1965, after  President Kennedy was killed, all the federal agencies "had  one objective, to take the heat off themselves." [1]
      By any reasonable standard, the last investigator to have been entrusted with the task of developing the facts surrounding the assassination was the FBI.
      The Warren Commission realized this, but decided to rely on the FBI nonetheless.  Its public position would be one of praise for the FBI's diligent cooperation.  But the secret executive sessions and confidential memoranda tell another story:  The Commission knew what J. Edgar Hoover was up to and played along.
      The Commission convened in secret that January 22 to discuss the rumor that Oswald had been a paid informant for the FBI.  As chapter 2 of this book documents, the FBI  had already preempted the Commission by publicly claiming  to have solved the assassination within three weeks of the  event.  At the January 22 session, an unidentified speaker,  probably General Counsel J. Lee Rankin, explained the basic  problem to the Commission:  "That is that the FBI is very  explicit that Oswald is the assassin . . . and they are  very explicit that there was no conspiracy."  However, the  speaker noted, "they have not run out all kinds of leads  in Mexico or in Russia. . . .  But they are concluding  that there can't be a conspiracy without those being run  out."  The inevitable question was raised:  "Why are  they so eager to make both of those  conclusions . . . ?"  Mr. Dulles  claimed to be confused as to why the FBI would want  to dispose of the case by finding Oswald guilty if, at the  same time, Oswald was rumored to have been in the FBI's  employ.  Dulles's question was quickly answered by Rankin:
A:  They would like to have us fold up and quit.
Boggs:  This closes the case, you see. Don't you see?
Dulles:  Yes, I see that.
Rawkin [sic]:  They found the man.  There is nothing more to do.  The Commission supports their conclusions, and we can go  on home and that is the end of it. [2]
The Commission engaged in a more explicit discussion of the  problem at its secret session five days later, on January  27.  John J. McCloy noted "we are so dependent upon them  [the FBI] for our facts that it might be a useful thing to  have him [Hoover] before us" for the purpose of requesting  further investigation "of the things that are still  troubling us."  The following discussion ensued:
      Mr. Rankin:  Part of our difficulty in regard to it is that they have no problems.  They have decided that it is Oswald who committed the assassination, they have decided that no one else was involved, they have decided --
      Sen. Russell:  They have tried the case and reached a  verdict on every aspect.
      Rep. Boggs:  You have put your finger on it. . . .
      Mr. Rankin:  . . . They have decided the case, and we are going to have maybe a thousand further inquiries that we say the Commission has to know all these things before it can pass on this.
      And I think their reaction probably would be, "Why do you want all that.  It is clear."
      Sen. Russell:  "You have our statement, what else do you need?"
      Mr. McCloy:  Yes, "We know who killed cock robin." [3]
      Thus, the Commission recognized the untenable position it  faced being put in if it relied on the FBI for additional  investigation when the FBI was claiming that the crime had  been solved and no more investigation was necessary.  Hoover had already staked the very reputation of  his agency on a solution that demanded Oswald as the lone  assassin.  It would have been a naive Commission indeed that  would have expected the FBI to destroy its own "solution" of  the crime with further investigation.  In light of these  secret discussions, the Commission's heavy dependence on the  FBI is nothing less than culpable.
      The central FBI conclusion, which the Commission adopted as  its own, was that Lee Harvey Oswald shot and killed President  Kennedy.  This conclusion was sustained solely on the finding  that bullets from Oswald's rifle had caused the wounds to  President Kennedy and Governor Connally.  If this one finding  crumbles, the case for Oswald's guilt must crumble with  it.  It was thus of paramount importance that the Commission  independently verify this FBI finding.
      The Commission was certainly aware of its responsibility.  In secret, the members admitted to each other the inadequacy  of the Bureau's ballistics findings as set forth in the FBI  Report.  At the executive session held December 16, 1963, Mr.  McCloy complained, "This bullet business leaves me totally  confused."  Chairman Warren concurred:  "It's totally  inconclusive." [4] Members of the Commission's staff, noting  the FBI's sloppy work, recognized a need "to facilitate  independent analysis of the Bureau's ballistic conclusions" [5] and to "secure from the FBI and consider the underlying  documents and reports related to the rifle and shells." [6]
      As I explain in chapter 3, the only way the Commission could  possibly have established a firm link between bullets fired  from Oswald's rifle and the wounds inflicted during the  assassination was to compare the metallic composition of all  the ballistic specimens through a meticulous scientific  process called spectrographic analysis.  The FBI claimed to  have run such tests and arrived at inconclusive results.  The  Commission took the FBI at its word, based on nonexpert  testimony, without ever having looked at the spectrographer's  report or having put the relevant documents into its  record.  Evidence has since been developed by Harold Weisberg  that a far more detailed comparative process, neutron  activation analysis (NAA), was utilized by the Commission  through the Atomic Energy Commission. [7] Proper NAA testing could at once have settled the doubts that plagued the Commission.
      The Commission knew the value of NAA and recognized the need  to apply the technology to the evidence in the  assassination.  Indeed, the AEC had immediately offered its  services to the FBI, only to be snubbed by Hoover.  Then, on  December 11, 1963, Paul C. Aebersold of the AEC wrote a  letter to Herbert J. Miller at the Department of Justice  explaining how the NAA process might be of vital importance  in the investigation of the President's murder. [8] Aebersold  noted that "it may be possible to determine by trace-element  measurements whether the fatal bullets were of composition  identical to that of the purportedly unfired shell" found in  the chamber of Oswald's rifle.  Likewise, "Other pieces of physical evidence in the case, such as clothing . . . might lend themselves to characterization by means of their  trace-element levels."  The Justice Department forwarded Aebersold's letter to the Commission, which immediately took  the matter up with Hoover.  The Commission sought "your advice  regarding the feasibility and desirability of taking advantage  of [the AEC's] offer." [9] When the Commission assembled on  January 27, 1964, Mr. Rankin advised as follows:
      Now, the bullet fragments are now, part of them are now, with the Atomic Energy Commission, who are trying to  determine by a new method, a process that they have, of whether they can relate them to various guns and the  different parts, the fragments, whether they are part of  one of the bullets that was broken and came out in part  through the neck, and just what particular assembly of  bullet they were part of.
      They have had it for the better part of two and a-half weeks, and we ought to get an answer. [10]
      Indeed, an investigative Commission aware of its obligation  to verify ballistic findings on which the case against an alleged presidential assassin depended "ought" to have insisted upon and received an immediate "answer" from an independent agency employing a sensitive new technology.  But this Commission never got an answer.
      And that was exactly how J. Edgar Hoover wanted things.
      Still awaiting the AEC's test results, the Commission on March 16, 1964, had staff lawyer Melvin Eisenberg discuss the NAA process with FBI Special Agent John F. Gallagher, the man who had run the Bureau's earlier spectrographic analysis.  Among the questions raised by Eisenberg was the application of NAA to President  Kennedy's clothing, particularly to the overlapping holes in the shirt near the collar button, which the FBI had been unable to relate spectrographically to the passage of a bullet.  Hoover disapproved the idea, writing the Commission  on March 18 that "It is not felt that the increased sensitivity of neutron activation analysis would contribute  substantially to the understanding of the origin of this hole  and frayed area" (20H2).  The Commission bowed to Hoover's  wish and never subjected the alleged bullet damage in President Kennedy's and Governor Connally's clothing to NAA.  The secrets that might be held by the minuscule traces of metal left on the clothing would not be unlocked by this Commission charged with evaluating "all the facts" of the assassination (R471).
      For what its own record discloses, the Commission merely  forgot about the scientific tests it knew were crucial  and proceeded without them to assemble a case against Oswald  (see chapter 2).  The Commission took not a word of testimony  about NAA's of the ballistic specimens, and allowed into the  published evidence references only to NAA's of the paraffin  casts of Oswald's hands and cheek made by the Dallas Police  (R562).  Even at that, as late as September 5, 1964, a week  before the Warren Report was set in type, the staff was still  trying to obtain from the FBI a description of the NAA process. [11]
      The only word the Commission ever officially received relating to these vital tests was communicated not through the AEC but through Hoover, whose brief letter remained buried in the Commission's unpublished files until Harold Weisberg dug it out. [12] Hoover did not write the Commission until July 8, 1964, after sections of the Report naming Oswald as the assassin had been preliminarily  drafted.  Although he then attempted to play down the value  of the NAA's, his letter stands as a monument to the  deliberate inadequacy of the Commission's investigation.
      To begin, Hoover's July 8 letter informed the Commission  that the NAA's conducted were incomplete:
      Because of the higher sensitivity of the neutron activation analysis, certain of the small lead fragments were then  subjected to neutron activation analysis and comparisons  with larger bullet fragments.
Thus, according to Hoover, there were no NAA comparisons of  any of the copper components of the recovered bullets and  fragments.  Hoover's listing also excluded several items of ballistics evidence possessed by the Commission, among them the unfired cartridge and the metallic traces on the clothing.  What were the results of this examination of fatally limited scope?  Hoover reported  the following only:
      While minor variations in composition were found by this method, these were not considered sufficient to permit  positively differentiating among the larger bullet fragments  and thus positively determining from which of the larger bullet fragments any given small lead fragment may have come.
I invite the reader to unscramble these semantics.  It is indeed impossible to know what Hoover considered a "larger bullet fragment," especially because a whole bullet,  Commission Exhibit 399, was alleged to have been tested but seems not to have been included within the above description of the test results.  In short, Hoover told the Commission very little, if anything, about the NAA results, and provided no documentation to support or clarify his incomprehensible summary.
      The Commission, having already decided that Oswald was the assassin, was content to leave the record in this hopeless state.  One researcher, Harold Weisberg, was not, and tried to force the government to release the  entire record concerning the spectrographic analysis by filing a suit under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), as  described in chapter 3.  After I completed the text of this  book, a federal court of appeals decided against Weisberg  and allowed the Department of Justice to continue suppression  of the spectrographer's report. [13] The decision was so  contrary to the FOIA that Congress almost immediately  moved to overrule it legislatively.  A 1974 amendment to  the FOIA cited the Weisberg case as a frightening  precedent and expressed Congress's intent that the government  not be permitted to suppress reports involving well-known  scientific procedures such as spectrography. [14] By  February 1975, when the new law took effect, Weisberg was  back in court, demanding not only the spectrographer's  report but also the full report on the NAA's performed by  the AEC for the Warren Commission.  The government produced  a batch of almost incomprehensible working papers, most of  them incomplete, some containing tables of elements with  statistical data missing.  These, it claimed, represented the  full extent of the relevant documents within its files.  The  government's claims defied belief:  the spectrographer's report that FBI Agent Robert Frazier swore had been made "a part of  the permanent records of the FBI" (5H69) did not exist;  the  NAA's that Rankin described to the Commission on January 27 had  not been conducted until May 15;  and the experts of the FBI and  AEC are equipped with such computerlike memories that they  could understand and evaluate the results of the spectrographic  and NAA testing without tabulating or recording literally  thousands of multi-digit figures.  Bald as the government's  representations were, they satisfied a federal district  judge. [15] Once again, release of meaningful, possibly  determinative scientific data on the assassination awaits the  appellate process.
      One need not await the release of the full documentation, if  it exists, to ask why it was not published by the Warren  Commission and made part of a complete historical record.  Nor  can one avoid the observation that the Commission's  investigation cannot have been complete or legitimate absent  this most fundamental scientific evidence, the value of which  was only too well known to the Commission.
      One conclusion is both basic and irrefutable:  the people have been lied to about the murder of their president and how that murder was investigated by the government.  Without  a doubt, the falsehoods and misrepresentations disseminated  by the government and the media concerning the assassination  of President Kennedy are as odious in our society as the  assassination itself.  The freedoms guaranteed under the  law are without meaning unless the people are honestly and  competently informed.  Indeed, when a government can get  away with whitewashing the truth about a president's murder,  the suggestion of authoritarianism is more than apparent.
      The reader should understand that I regard the significance  of the Warren Commission's failure not as part of an  intriguing "whodunnit" but rather as a frightening breakdown  of the principle of governmental accountability.  Surely the  question of who killed the President must concern us all,  but over twelve years after the murder, speculation about  who was responsible becomes a futile exercise of  questionable value.  I have yet to see a shred of credible  evidence linking any known group or individual with the  President's murder.  Yet speculation on that score is as  rife today as it is profitable.  Those who engage in it have  been dubbed "conspiracy theorists."
      In this book I do not deal with theory;  I deal with  fact.  The facts are that we do not know who killed President Kennedy, that the Warren Commission named the wrong man as the assassin and never searched for the truth of the crime.  Although I do not allege that the Commission or its staff knew that Lee Harvey Oswald was not the assassin, the documents presented here reveal that no possibility other than Oswald as the assassin was ever considered in the investigation.  What this means,  regardless of motives (about which I am not competent to speculate), is that the Commission left President  Kennedy's murder unsolved, tacitly allowing the real  assassin or assassins to go free.
      A reader approaching the field of critical works on the assassination faces a thicket of conflicting theories,  doctrines, and allegations.  I think it only fair to let the reader know in advance where I believe my book stands within the maze.  First, however, it would be helpful to review briefly the events of the assassination and its  subsequent history.
      President Kennedy was shot to death at 12:30 P.M., c.s.t., on November 22, 1963, as he rode through the streets of Dallas, Texas, in a motorcade.  Texas Governor John Connally, seated in the President's open limousine, received serious bullet wounds in the  shooting.  Immediately, the motorcade sped to nearby Parkland  Hospital, where a team of doctors tried in vain to save the President's life.  The President's death was announced, and, over the objections of the local authorities, who then had exclusive jurisdiction in the crime, the body was forcefully removed from the hospital and flown back to Washington.  Before the plane bearing the President's body took off, Vice-President Lyndon Johnson, who had ridden in the motorcade, took the oath of office and  assumed the duties of President.
      Within forty-five minutes of the assassination, a Dallas Police Officer, J. D. Tippit, was shot to death in a Dallas suburb.  A half-hour later, Lee Harvey Oswald was arrested  in a movie theater a half mile from the site of the Tippit murder. He was first accused of killing only Tippit, but by that evening he became the prime suspect in the murder of the President as well.  Throughout that hectic weekend, the Dallas Police made repeated public accusations  of Oswald's guilt.  Oswald steadfastly maintained that he  was innocent and said he would prove it when he was brought  to trial.
      The trial never came, however.  On November 24, Oswald,  still in police custody, was shot to death by Jack Ruby.
      Elimination of the only suspect in the assassination precluded a trial that might have turned up the facts about the President's murder through the adversary  system of justice.  In its stead, President Johnson on November 29 appointed a commission to "evaluate and report  upon the facts relating to the assassination . . . and  the subsequent violent death of the man charged with the assassination"(R471).  Earl Warren, then Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, presided over this  commission, whose members included Senators Richard  Russell and John Sherman Cooper, Representatives Hale Boggs and Gerald Ford, Allen Dulles, and John J.  McCloy.  This panel, which became known as the Warren Commission, appointed a General Counsel, J. Lee Rankin, who headed a group of fourteen Assistant Counsel and twelve staff members.  Throughout the Warren Commission's ten-month investigation, it was this staff of lawyers under Rankin who took virtually all the testimony and composed the final report.
      The Commission itself conceded that its task was not executed by its prestigious but preoccupied members.  In the words of the Warren Report, it was the staff that "undertook the work of the Commission with a wealth of legal and investigative experience."  "Highly qualified personnel from several Federal agencies, assigned to the Commission at its request" also assisted in the  investigation(Rxi).  Members of the legal staff, divided by  subject into teams, were responsible for analyzing and  summarizing much of the information originally received from the various agencies, and for "determin[ing] the issues, sort[ing] out the unresolved problems, and  recommend[ing] additional investigation to the  Commission"(Rxii).
      On September 24, 1964, the Warren Commission submitted an  888-page report to the President.  (This report was later  to become known as the Warren Report.)  The Commission  concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald alone had assassinated  President Kennedy, and maintained that it had seen no  evidence indicating that Oswald and Ruby, together or  alone, had been part of a conspiracy to murder the  President.  Two months after the issuance of its Report,  the Commission published as a massive appendix the evidence  upon which the Report was allegedly based, including  transcripts of witness testimony, evidential exhibits, and  thousands of documents.  This evidence is contained in  twenty-six volumes.
      Immediately upon its release, the Warren Report was met by an overwhelmingly favorable response from the nation's "establishment" press. [16] This response, analyzed objectively, was in fact a blatant instance of irresponsible journalism, for newsmen lavished praise on the Report before they could have read and analyzed it -- two months before the evidence upon which it rested was released to the public.
      Nevertheless, the Warren Report, which was introduced to  the public as the definitive and final word on the assassination, was soon to be seriously questioned;  a  national controversy would erupt in which the Warren Commission, its Report, its evidence, and its workings would be challenged by a broad range of critics.
      Criticism of the Commission and doubts about the  assassination were brewing prior to the issuance of the  Report, although they did not command broad public  attention and were regarded more as suspicious rumblings of foreign origin.  By the end of 1965 things were beginning to change.  Vincent Salandria published a well-documented  critique of the medical/ballistics conclusions of the  Commission in a small left-of-center magazine. The Oswald  Affair, by respected correspondent Leo Sauvage, was  published in France, challenging the conclusion that Oswald  was guilty.  In late 1965, The Unanswered Questions About  President Kennedy's Assassination, a hasty critical analysis  by reporter Sylvan Fox, was published. Whitewash, written  in 1965 by Harold Weisberg, was the first full-length book  to examine in detail the Commission's investigation, and  bore the unenviable burden of "breaking" the subject of  Warren Report criticism in the United States.  After Weisberg  published his book in a private printing at his own expense,  several other works critical of the official version of the  assassination appeared on the market, including, in  chronological order of publication: Inquest, by Edward Jay  Epstein; Rush to Judgment, by Mark Lane (Lane had been among  the first to defend the dead Oswald, and, at his own urging,  gave testimony before the Warren Commission); The Second  Oswald, by Richard Popkin; Whitewash II and Photographic  Whitewash, by Harold Weisberg; Accessories After the Fact, by Sylvia Meagher;  and Six Seconds in Dallas, by Josiah Thompson.
      These books were widely reviewed and often appeared on best-seller lists.  They were responsible for generating a considerable national controversy over the findings of the Warren Commission, in which several responsible periodicals called for a new investigation [17] and about two-thirds of the public rejected the allegation of  Oswald's lone guilt. [18]
      Early in 1967, New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison made the dubitable announcement that his office, after conducting an extensive investigation, had "solved" the assassination. [19] One figure in the plot  alleged by Garrison died immediately before he was to be arrested. [20] Soon after, a New Orleans businessman, Clay Shaw, was arrested and charged with conspiring to  murder President Kennedy. [21] Finally the assassination was to get its day in court.  But Shaw did not come to trial until January 1969, and he was easily acquitted after a two-month proceeding in which all the shocking evidence against him promised by Garrison failed to  materialize. [22] Garrison was in consequence widely  condemned by the media, and the New Orleans fiasco caused the  virtual destruction of whatever foundation for credibility  had previously been established by critics of the Warren  Report.  Garrison did not refute or in any tangible way  diminish the legitimacy of several responsible and documented  criticisms of the official version of the assassination.  But  his unethical behavior and the mockery of justice (involving  only Shaw) perpetrated under him were "bad press";  it left  the public and the media highly suspicious of Warren Report  criticism.
      Then, in June 1972, there was the break-in at the Watergate and the beginning of a new national  consciousness, a skepticism toward government and an  unwillingness to believe the official word.  By the time  President Nixon resigned in August 1974, deception,  dishonesty, and malfeasance in government were accepted  as the reality, even expected as the norm.  Suddenly, the notion that the government had not told the truth about John Kennedy's murder did not seem so outrageous.
      It was not long before there formed a new wave of doubt  about the Warren Commission's findings.  Revelations about  the illegal domestic activities of the CIA led President  Ford to appoint a presidential commission in February  1975.  This commission's scope was quickly expanded to  include allegations that the CIA had been involved in the  Kennedy assassination as well as numerous plots against  foreign leaders, notably Fidel Castro of Cuba. [23] However,  the commission, whose investigation was headed by an ex-staff  lawyer for the Warren Commission, David Belin, chose to  "investigate" only the most unfounded of the charges against  the CIA relating to the assassination.  The outlandish  allegations of Dick Gregory and A. J. Weberman that E. Howard  Hunt and Frank Sturgis were arrested in Dealey Plaza on November 22 provided easy targets for Mr. Belin's selectively  aimed investigative cannons. [24] It soon became public  knowledge that the United States had indeed been involved in  the assassination business, having used the CIA and the Mafia  to make attempts on the lives of Castro, Trujillo, and  Lumumba, among others.  Doubts grew.  In the fall of 1975  it was revealed that the Dallas office of the FBI, on orders  from J. Edgar Hoover, had destroyed a threatening note left  there by Oswald. [25] After the FBI confirmed this deliberate  destruction of evidence, [26] no one could deny that  there had been some sort of conspiracy to conceal by the  government.  Representative Don Edwards announced that his  subcommittee would hold hearings into the FBI's withholding  of evidence from the Warren Commission, and two Senators on a  select committee investigating the CIA formed a special  subcommittee to study the need for a congressional investigation of the assassination.  Clearly the tide was turning.  Even the Commission's staunchest defenders were forced to call for  a new investigation, including David Belin [27] and President Ford, [28] both Warren Commission alumni.
      I support the movement toward a new investigation, but the  vital question now concerns what should be investigated.  A  congressional reopening of the case should focus on those  areas which will yield meaningful findings and serve a  constructive national purpose.  Such an investigation would  inevitably have to deal with the question of "Who killed  Kennedy?"  However, my own familiarity with the evidence  leads me to believe that an inquiry limited only to that  question would be doomed to achieving very little.  The major  question at this point is "Who covered up the truth about the  murder, how, and why?"  A congressional investigation could  establish with little effort that the Warren Report's  "solution" of the crime is erroneous;  the Commission's files,  as well as the files of other federal agencies, would provide  a fertile starting point for the determination of  responsibility in the cover-up.  The participants in all  stages of the official investigation of the assassination are  either known or identifiable, and those individuals still  living can be subjected to cross-examination.  I do not  personally believe that the federal investigators knew who  killed President Kennedy.  But the evidence is certain that  decisions were made, at times and levels now unknown, that  the truth about the assassination should not be discovered,  that falsehood should be disseminated to the people.  When such decisions are made by the government, the Congress has a  reason, indeed an obligation, to investigate and to assure  that the executive is made to account.
      Thus, it is my conviction that the only responsible approach to  be taken toward the assassination at this point is to focus upon  the question of the Warren Commission's failure, rather than to  speculate about conspiracies and solutions for which there is no  evidence.  My own review of the critical literature and the  varied positions of those opposing the Warren Report persuades  me that this approach is in fact the only viable one.  I hope  that a brief elaboration will help the reader to understand my  position.
      The early writings on the assassination by Weisberg, Meagher, Lane, and Epstein focused on the inadequacy of the official solution to the crime.  Each author approached the subject in his or her own manner, although, in my estimate, the books by Lane and Epstein were seriously flawed.
      Harold Weisberg was the first and the strongest advocate of  the doctrine that the assassination should be studied from  the perspective of the official noninvestigation.  Weisberg  has continually stressed the great implications of the  fraudulent investigation for our government and our  society.  His own words on the subject forcefully convey his  approach:
      In its approach, operations and Report, the Commission considered one possibility alone -- that Lee Harvey Oswald, without assistance, assassinated the President and killed Officer Tippit.  Never has such a tremendous array of power been turned against a single man, and he was dead.  Yet even without opposition the Commission failed. . . .
      A crime such as the assassination of the President of the United States cannot be left as the Report . . . has left it, without even the probability of a solution, with assassins and murderers free, and free to repeat their crimes and enjoy what benefits they may have expected to enjoy therefrom.  No  President is ever safe if Presidential assassins are  exculpated.  Yet that is what the Commission has done.  In  finding Oswald "guilty," it has found those who assassinated  him "innocent."  If the President is not safe, then neither  is the country. [29]
      Much more does it relate to each individual American, to the integrity of the institutions of our society, when anything happens to any president -- especially when he is assassinated.
      The consignment of President John F. Kennedy to history with  the dubious epitaph of the whitewashed investigation is a  grievous event. [30]
      Above all, the Report leaves in jeopardy the rights of all Americans and the honor of the nation.  When what happened  to Oswald once he was in the hands of the public authority  can occur in this country with neither reprimand nor  question, no one is safe.  When the Federal government puts  its stamp of approval on such unabashed and open denial of  the most basic legal rights of any American, no matter how  insignificant he may be, then no American can depend on  having those rights, no matter what his power or  connections. The rights of all Americans, as the  Commission's chairman said when wearing his Chief Justice's  hat, depend upon each American's enjoyment of these same rights. [31]
Perhaps the simplest statement of the context enunciated by Weisberg is contained in the quotation that I included in the Preface of this book:  "If the government can  manufacture, suppress and lie when a President is cut  down -- and get away with it -- what cannot follow?" [32]
      The basic focus of Mrs. Meagher's book is set forth in its very appropriate title, Accessories After the Fact:  The Warren Commission, The Authorities and The Report. Mrs.  Meagher scrupulously contrasts the statements contained in  the Warren Report with the Commission's published hearings  and exhibits.  She finds that:
      The first pronounces Oswald guilty;  the second, instead of corroborating the verdict reached by the Warren Commission,  creates a reasonable doubt of Oswald's guilt and even a  powerful presumption of his complete innocence of all the  crimes of which he was accused. [33]
As stated by Mrs. Meagher, the corollary to this finding is as follows:
      Because of the nature of the investigation, it is probable that the assassins who shot down President John F. Kennedy  have gone free, undetected.  The Warren Report has served  merely to delay their identification and the process of justice. [34]
This is to say that the Warren Commission and the federal  authorities, regardless of their motives or conscious intent, made themselves accessories after the fact in the President's murder by constructing a false solution that allowed the real criminals to go free.
      Mark Lane's best-selling Rush to Judgment was presented  as a critique of the Commission's investigation.  One may  question Lane's selection and presentation of  evidence;  certain basic flaws in the book raise more  serious questions about its value as a "critique" of the  official inquiry.  The Warren Commission's investigation cannot be understood without reference to the relationship between  the Commission and its staff, for it was the staff that handled virtually all of the work and digested the information that filtered up to the Commission members.  Yet  in Rush to Judgment the staff is never identified.  Where  questioning of a particular witness is quoted, names of  individual staff members have been replaced by an anonymous  "Q."  An introduction by Professor Hugh Trevor-Roper  states:  "It is clear that the bulk of the work fell upon  the Chairman and upon the assistant counsel and staff [who  for Lane's readers are nameless]." [35] This assertion  unjustly singles out Earl Warren for blame, although he never  came close to doing "the bulk of the work." Trevor-Roper seems  immediately to thwart the supposed purpose of the book by  offering the assurance that "moderate, rational men will  naturally and . . . rightly" reject the idea that the  Commission and the "existing agencies" "sought to reach a  certain conclusion at the expense of the facts . . . that  they . . . were dishonest . . . [that the]  Commission . . . engaged in a conspiracy to cover up a  crime. . . ." [36] Lane surely no longer accepts this kind  but false view of the Commission's work, and has omitted the  introduction by the prestigious Trevor-Roper from the 1975  paperback reissue of his book.  In the intervening years,  however, Lane has taken public stances that have seriously  compromised his credibility.  In the midst of his close  association with Jim Garrison prior to the acquittal of Clay  Shaw, Lane told the press that he knew the identities of the  real murderers of President Kennedy. [37] During the 1968  presidential campaign, in which he ran for Vice-President on  a ticket with Dick Gregory, Lane held a press conference in  Philadelphia to announce that Garrison "has substantially  solved the assassination conspiracy.  He knows who was  involved and has strong evidence.  I've seen the  evidence;  I've talked to the witnesses." [38] Lane also  claimed to have two copies of this evidence, which he  promised to release if the government kept Shaw from going  to trial.  The evidence presented at Shaw's trial, needless  to say, did not solve the assassination;  neither Garrison  nor Lane ever possessed the dispositive evidence each  claimed to have.
      Doubters who sought a rational and scholarly treatment of  the Commission's failure flocked to Edward Jay Epstein  when his critique of the inner workings of the Commission, Inquest, was published in 1966;  they were soon to be  disappointed.  Many of Epstein's most telling points were  based on unrecorded interviews with Commission members and  staff lawyers and thus could not be verified when the  inevitable denials came.  Yet, for all his pretenses,  Epstein actually defended the official  investigation.  According to Epstein, the Warren Commission was involved in a situation that might have excused lying in  the "national interest."  He rightly asserted that the  "nation's faith in its own institutions was held to be at  stake." [39] But, in concluding his book, he found that "in establishing its version of the truth, the Warren Commission  acted to reassure the nation and protect the national  interest." [40] This, he implied, justified the failure to make "it clear that very substantial evidence indicated the  presence of a second assassin." [41] Three years after writing  his book, Epstein totally reversed his position in a New York  Times Magazine article. [42] "Nor is there any substantial  evidence that I know of," he wrote in 1969, "that indicates  there was more than one rifleman firing."  Suddenly, to  Epstein, it was incidental that the Commission "had conducted  a less than exhaustive investigation."  Of the "great number  of inconsistencies" between the official evidence and the  official conclusions, he could say only that "there is no  formula for adding up inconsistencies and arriving at the  truth," as if this platitude would rescue the Commission's  findings.  Those who suggest that these massive  "inconsistencies" prove the invalidity of the Warren Report,  Epstein opined, merely engage in "obfuscatory rhetoric."
      Perhaps the two best-known books departing from the perspective of the inadequacies of the official  investigation and entering into the realm of alternative  theories are Richard Popkin's The Second Oswald and Josiah Thompson's Six Seconds in Dallas. Both books cite a wealth of evidence but are thoroughly inadequate in themselves,  and thus, to my thinking, are counterproductive. The Second  Oswald was introduced as "the third stage of a great case"  and promoted as "the startling new theory of the  assassination." [43] The theory -- that someone, resembling  and posing as Oswald, planted incriminating circumstantial  evidence during the two months before the assassination -- was  hardly new.  Harold Weisberg had devoted a chapter of his Whitewash to it, although not in the context of suggesting a  solution to the crime.  Weisberg's copyrighted work was never acknowledged by Popkin, who falsely claimed singular and  original credit.  Popkin's preoccupation with the importance  of solving the crime has led him into strange pursuits, the  latest of which was to inform President Ford that John Kennedy  was killed by "zombie assassins," programmed like robots by  the CIA. [44] Professor Thompson's book, a slick presentation  utilizing numerous photographs, refuses to name any assassins  but offers a scenerio [sic] in which three assassins fired four  shots in Dealey Plaza.  The theory is hopelessly flawed.  It  is based on a first shot fired later than the evidence  indicates; [45] it relies heavily on interpretations of the  Zapruder film that are tenuous at best; [46] it fails to  account for at least one shot that missed the car; [47] and  it is riddled with basic inaccuracies such as the  misidentification of a cartridge case first forwarded to the  FBI by the Dallas Police (an integral part of the "theory"). [48]
      Of all those critics who began with a desire to help but who wound up damaging their credibility through irresponsible  action, no one has been more of a disappointment than Dr.  Cyril Wecht.  For years Dr. Wecht was an outspoken and highly  qualified critic of President Kennedy's autopsy.  His  exceptional credentials in forensic pathology were of great  value to many critics researching the case.  Then, in  1972, Dr. Wecht applied for and was granted access to the photographs  and X rays of President Kennedy's body taken during the  autopsy.  Most critics rejoiced that finally an expert from  "our side" would be allowed to study this long-suppressed  evidence.
      I had great reservations as to the advisability of Dr. Wecht's  viewing this material.  Affirmatively, there was little that  the pictures and X rays could tell because the autopsy itself  had been hopelessly botched.  The report of an earlier  examination by an expert panel convened at the government's  behest in 1968 had already revealed enough information to  destroy the official reconstruction of the crime and suggest  perjury in the testimony of the autopsy pathologists before  the Warren Commission. [49] Thus, I felt that an examination  by Dr. Wecht in 1972 could accomplish little and actually be  disserving, because Dr. Wecht, for all his expertise in  forensic pathology, was never an expert on the assassination.  I  knew that Dr. Wecht was closely advised by critics whom I  considered irresponsible, and I feared the sort of public  posture he would assume as a result of their counsels.  When  Dr. Wecht solicited my help prior to viewing the pictures and X  rays, [50] I advised him  of my position [51] and received no  response.  Years later I learned that he was so enraged at my  suggestions of caution that he forbade his panel of "advisers"  from ever communicating his findings to me. [52]
      Dr. Wecht's behavior subsequent to viewing the suppressed  photographic material has exceeded my worst expectations.  His  early statements and writings sensationalized the fact that  President Kennedy's brain was missing, [53] seriously  overrating the evidential value of the brain. [54] He initially  chose to temper his remarks about the pictures and X rays  themselves by claiming that the incomplete state of the  evidence made a conclusive determination of the source of the  shots impossible. [55] However, Dr. Wecht did not hesitate to  offer unfounded speculation about the assassination or the  murder of Officer Tippit. [56] On one occasion he stated:  "I  believe the evidence shows conclusively . . . that the  assassination was the work of a conspiracy, and that the  Central Intelligence Agency -- the CIA -- was definitely  involved." [57] When Dr. Wecht ultimately reduced his findings  to an article for a medical journal, his position changed,  although hardly for the better.  He toned down his earlier caveats about the limits of the medical evidence and concluded  that the available evidence led him to believe that President Kennedy was struck by two bullets from the rear. [58] In my opinion, it was highly irresponsible for  Dr. Wecht to announce such a tenuous conclusion while ignoring  the irrefutable evidence that the pictures and X rays destroy  the integrity of all the medical evidence upon which the Warren  Report was based -- as he himself had testified in open court  years before.  In some cases it is difficult to believe that  errors in Dr. Wecht's article could have been inadvertent.  The  article casually notes that an X ray of the President's head  revealed at least three fragments of metal in the left hemisphere  of the brain; [59] the article also claims to vouch for the  accuracy of the description of the same X ray contained in the  report of the 1968 panel review. [60] What Dr. Wecht failed to  tell his readers is that the 1968 panel stated that there were no metallic fragments depicted on the X ray to the left of the midline of the head, a finding which, according to that panel,  renders the theory of a frontal shot "not reasonable to  postulate." [61] If Dr. Wecht's observation is correct, he  deceived his readers in claiming to verify the earlier panel  report and in failing to note the glaring discrepancy.
      Dr. Wecht's apparent desire to solve a crime that cannot be  solved has earned him the dubious honor of being quoted  extensively by defenders of the Warren Report. [62] Even the  1975 presidential commission investigating the CIA cited  Dr. Wecht's testimony and writings to support the notion that  President Kennedy was shot only from behind. [63] Dr. Wecht,  ostensibly still a "critic," protested that he had been  misrepresented and promised to eat the transcript of his  testimony -- on the steps of the White House -- if he really said  what had been attributed to him. [64] Soon Wecht admitted  that his words had merely been used out of context. [65] But  there would be no eating on the White House steps;  the  testimony had already consumed Dr. Wecht.
      Facts, not theories, documentation, not speculation, are the  only responsible approach to the sordid history of President  Kennedy's murder.  The evidence is simply insufficient to  allow any determination of what really happened on November  22, 1963, and a critic attempting to fashion a solution  without respecting the limits of the evidence is doomed to  sacrifice his credibility.
      The crime remains unsolved, and, as I document here, the  federal government played a direct and deliberate role in  assuring that it would remain unsolved.  This is a fact far  more frightening than even the most outrageous theory about  who committed the crime.  It is also intolerable.  One of the  few remedies available to the average citizen is to set the  record straight, however and wherever it can be done, in  order to lay the foundation for responsible congressional  action.
      To set the record straight is the purpose of this book.  Here  I present documented proof of two points essential to any  understanding of the assassination and its official  "investigation":
Lee Harvey Oswald did not fire any shots in the assassination;
The Warren Commission considered no possibility other than that  Oswald was the lone assassin, and consciously endeavored to  fabricate a case against Oswald.
      It is not the critic's responsibility to explain the motives of  the Commission members or their staff, or to name assassins and  conspirators.  The only responsibility of the critic is to deal  with the facts and never to avoid or attempt to modify, without  factual basis, the implications of the evidence.  So, when the  Commissioners decided in advance that the wrong man was the lone  assassin, whatever their intentions, they protected the real  assassins.  Through their staff they misinformed the American people and falsified history.  Regardless of whether their false  solution to the crime was a "politically acceptable explanation,"  they did nothing to rectify the politically "unacceptable"  fact.  When a government can get away with what ours did at the  death of its president, the presidency and the people are  betrayed.
      The assassination of a president is a total negation of the  electoral process, which is the very foundation of democratic  institutions.  With the Warren Report, the government sacrificed  its credibility, and undermined any legitimate basis the people  might have had for confidence in it.  Very simply, a government  that disseminates blatant falsehoods about the murder of its  chief executive and frames an innocent man is not  accountable to and does not deserve the confidence of the people.
      This is a disquieting reality, but one that must be faced if integrity is to be restored to our government and its institutions.  The government must function properly, with  decency, honesty, and respect for the law.  In framing  Oswald and exculpating presidential assassins, the  Commission mocked the law and every principle of  justice.  In the words of former Supreme Court Justice  Louis Brandeis, "In a government of laws, the very  existence of the government will be imperiled if it fails  to observe the law scrupulously." [66]
      This book is not a call to the people to lose faith in their government.  It is a call to reason, so that no one will  unquestioningly accept governmental assurances without first  checking the facts.  In the end we must face reality;  we  must reckon with truth no matter where it is found.
__________
Harold Weisberg, Whitewash:  The Report on the Warren Report (Hyattstown, Md.:  Harold Weisberg, 1965), p. 189.
Transcript of Warren Commission executive session of January 22, 1964, pp. 11-13.  The transcript is reproduced in Harold  Weisberg's Post Mortem (Frederick, Md.: Harold Weisberg, 1975),  pp. 475ff.
Transcript of Warren Commission executive session of January 27, 1964, pp. 170-71.  The full transcript is reproduced in Harold  Weisberg's Whitewash IV:  JFK Assassination Transcript (Frederick, Md.: Harold Weisberg, 1974).
Transcript of Warren Commission executive session of December 16, 1963, p. 11.
Memorandum dated February 10, 1964, from Charles Shaffer to  Howard Willens, available from the National Archives.  This  document is reproduced in Weisberg's Post Mortem at p. 488.
Memorandum dated January 23, 1964, from Francis Adams and Arlen Specter to J. Lee Rankin, attachment II, item (c), available  from the National Archives.  This document is reproduced in  Weisberg's Post Mortem at p. 490.
See Post Mortem, chap. 29 and pp. 407ff.
Aebersold's letter is available from the National Archives.  The  letter notes:  "Our work leads one to expect that the tremendous  sensitivity of the activation analysis method is capable of  providing useful information that may not be otherwise attainable."
Letter from J. Lee Rankin to J. Edgar Hoover, dated January 7, 1964.
Transcript of Warren Commission executive session of January 27, 1964, p. 194.
Memorandum from Melvin Eisenberg to Norman Redlich dated September  5, 1964.  This document is reproduced in Weisberg's Post Mortem at p. 477.
See Post Mortem, chap. 29 and p. 607.
Weisberg v. U.S. Department of Justice, 489 F.2d 1195 (D.C. Dir.  1973).
During the Senate debate on the 1974 FOIA amendments, Senator  Edward Kennedy expressed his understanding that one of the  proposed amendments would "in effect override the court decisions  in the court of appeals on the Weisberg against United States." Senator Philip Hart, who had written the amendment, responded:   "That is its purpose." Congressional Record of May 30, 1974,  S9329-30.  The official legislative history is contained in the  Conference Report, H. Rep. 93-1380, 93d Congress, 2d Session, 1974.
Weisberg's second FOIA suit for the spectrographic and NAA results  is described in detail with much of the accompanying documentation  reproduced in Post Mortem, pp. 407ff.  See also the affidavit of  FBI Agent John W. Kilty filed by the government in the suit, at  pp. 623-24.
E.g., see Anthony Lewis's coverage of the Warren Report and  editorial comment by James Reston, New York Times, September 28, 1964; Washington Post coverage of the same date, including  praise by Robert Donovan, p. A14, Roscoe Drummond, p. A13, Marquis Childs, and an editorial saying the Report "deserves acceptance as  the whole truth, and nothing but the truth," a favorable editorial  in the Washington Evening Star, September 28, 1964, p. A-8; Time (October 2, 1964) and Newsweek (October 5, 1964) carried  lengthy "news" features praising the Report.
E.g., see Life, November 25, 1966, pp. 38-48; Ramparts,  October 1966, p. 3; Saturday Evening Post, January 14, 1967,  and December 2, 1967, p. 88.
In May 1967 a Harris Survey revealed that 66 percent of the  American public believed that the assassination was not the work  of one man but was part of a broader plot.
Philadelphia Inquirer, February 25, 1967.
Washington Post, February 23, 1967.
Philadelphia Inquirer, March 2, 1967.
Ibid., March 2, 1969.
New York Times, March 8, 1975.
New York Times, May 12, 1975.  See Report to the President by  the Commission on CIA Activities Within the United States (June  1975), Chap. 19.
Dallas Times Herald, August 31, 1975.
New York Times, September 1, 1975, p. 7.
New York Times, November 23, 1975.
New York Times, November 27, 1975.
Weisberg, Whitewash, p. 188.
