Goodnight Sweetheart (TV Series 1993–2016) - IMDb
IMDb
There was an error trying to load your rating for this title.
Some parts of this page won't work property. Please reload or try later.
X Beta I'm Watching This!
Keep track of everything you watch; tell your friends.
Error
Mr Gary Sparrow is an ordinary bloke with an extraordinary life. By day, a very bored and uninspired TV repairman but by night, an accidental time traveler.
Creators:
Gary opens a shop selling war-time memorabilia brought back from the past in Duckett's plaza, a shopping parade on the site of the passage. Jayne Mansfield, the estate agent who helped him get the ...
8.7
It is 1962, 17 years after Gary Sparrow got stuck in 1945 London, and Gary realises that he has the chance to see himself being born. But an encounter with himself catapults him back to the future - ...
8.7
On the eve of his wedding Gary attends two stag nights - one arranged by Ron and another set up by visiting Canadian pilots at the Royal Oak. Gary gets very drunk and almost ends up heading out to ...
8.6
a list of 30 titles
created 20 Mar 2012
a list of 27 titles
created 04 Jan 2014
a list of 36 titles
created 08 Feb 2014
a list of 21 titles
created 30 Nov 2014
a list of 24 titles
created 2 days ago
Search for " Goodnight Sweetheart " on Amazon.com
Connect with IMDb
Title: Goodnight Sweetheart (1993–2016)
7.6/10
Want to share IMDb's rating on your own site? Use the HTML below.
You must be a registered user to use the IMDb rating plugin.
The daily lives of three London flatmates.
Stars: Matthew Cottle,  Samantha Womack,  Neil Stuke
It's about a young couple living in a basement apartment and the funny thing that happen to them and their family.
Stars: Nicholas Lyndhurst,  Janet Dibley,  Tenniel Evans
Gordon Brittas is the manager of the Whitbury-Newtown Leisure Centre. Despite his ambition and good intentions, everything seems to go wrong when he's around, despite the best efforts of ... See full summary  »
Stars: Chris Barrie,  Harriet Thorpe,  Michael Burns
Victor Meldrew is a retiree who attracts bad luck. If he's not driving his long suffering wife Margeret crazy with his constant moaning, he's fighting with neighbors.
Stars: Richard Wilson,  Annette Crosbie,  Doreen Mantle
Classic comedy following the misadventures of two Wheeler Dealer brothers Del Boy and Rodney Trotter who scrape their living by selling dodgy goods believing that next year they will be millionaires.
Stars: David Jason,  Nicholas Lyndhurst,  Roger Lloyd Pack
Arkwright is a tight-fisted shop owner in Doncaster, who will stop at nothing to keep his profits high and his overheads low, even if this means harassing his nephew Granville. Arkwright's ... See full summary  »
Stars: Ronnie Barker,  David Jason,  Lynda Baron
The prison life of Fletcher, a criminal serving a five-year sentence, as he strives to bide his time, keep his record clean, and refuses to be ground down by the prison system.
Stars: Ronnie Barker,  Brian Wilde,  Fulton Mackay
This comedy series is all about two mates, Gary and Tony who share a two bedroom home. They are grown men who act like a couple of drunk two year olds, who spend their time either drinking ... See full summary  »
Stars: Martin Clunes,  Caroline Quentin,  Leslie Ash
During WW2, in a fictional British seaside town, a ragtag group of Home Guard local defense volunteers prepare for an imminent German invasion.
Stars: Arthur Lowe,  John Le Mesurier,  Clive Dunn
Classic 1960s British comedy series about a middle aged man and his elderly father who run an unsuccessful 'rag and bone' business (collecting and selling junk). Harold (the son) wants to ... See full summary  »
Stars: Wilfrid Brambell,  Harry H. Corbett,  Frank Thornton
Three old men from Yorkshire who have never grown up face the trials of their fellow town citizens and everyday life and stay young by reminiscing about the days of their youth and attempting feats not common to the elderly.
Stars: Peter Sallis,  Jane Freeman,  Kathy Staff
Comedy series following the lives of sisters Tracey and Sharon who are left to fend for themselves after their husbands are arrested for armed robbery.
Stars: Pauline Quirke,  Linda Robson,  Lesley Joseph
Edit
Storyline
Gary Sparrow lives in the 1990s with his wife but has a route back to the 1940s where he has a mistress. Gary has a tough time keeping his double-life a secret from the two women as he jumps back and forth in time. Only his friend Ron knows the truth. Written by Rob Hartill
18 November 1993 (UK) See more  »
Also Known As:
Спокойной ночи, дорогая See more  »
Filming Locations:
Maurice Gran and Laurence Marks devised "Goodnight Sweetheart" while writing Love Hurts (1992). See more »
Quotes
A very much underrated comedy, which was a real pleasure to watch.
6 June 2010 | by mary-jane-xxxx
(United Kingdom) – See all my reviews
The creators of this programme set themselves a difficult challenge. This was to make a comedy out of a very dark subject, the Second World War, and a social taboo, bigamy. Yet they succeeded and gave the world this hilarious sit-com.
I just loved the peripheral characters, especially Ron, who got all the best lines.
Yvonne was wonderful as Gary's first wife. She was amusing and very sarcastic; she always had a very apt answer for Gary. Yet she was also very vulnerable. The character of Phoebe tried by patience a little. She was intelligent and strong enough to run a public house in a rough area of London during a war and yet she needed the support of Reg and deferred to Gary's opinion on almost every issue.
2 of 2 people found this review helpful.  Was this review helpful to you?
Yes
