Captain Archibald Haddock | Tintin Wiki | Fandom powered by Wikia
Tintin and Alph-Art
Captain Archibald Haddock is a retired merchant sailor who likes Loch Lomond whiskey and hates mineral water. He is also one of Tintin 's closest friends. Haddock is highly addicted to whiskey but he also likes other spirits like rum. He first appeared in The Crab with the Golden Claws and had been in every Tintin  book since then. 
Contents
[ show ]
History
Captain Haddock sailed over twenty years with his old friend, Captain Chester , before becoming commander of the Karaboudjan where his alcoholism was taken advantage of by his crooked first mate Allan Thompson . Tintin rescued him from the ship and the two friends were barely ever parted again. He is a direct descendant of the 17th century seafarer Sir Francis Haddock , a sea captain under Charles II. He was the captain for two expeditions during his adventures with Tintin, commanding the Aurora in The Shooting Star during the expedition to find the meteorite and the Sirius , Captain Chester's ship that he lent to Haddock to find Red Rackham's treasure. At the end of the latter adventure, Haddock acquired with the proceeds of the sale of his friend Cuthbert Calculus ' patent for the Shark-proof submarine , Marlinspike Hall , which once belonged to Captain Haddock's ancestor Francis. Haddock retired from sailing there and invited Tintin and Calculus to indefinitely live there with him.
Name
As for the origin of the name of Captain Haddock's name, who first appeared in Hergé 's notes in 1938 , according to Philippe Goddin , author of Chronology of a work, it is inspired by Captain Craddock, Franco-German film Hanns Schwarz and Max Vaucorbeil (1931), of which Hergé was a big fan. In the original french version of The Crab with the Golden Claws, Captain Haddock even sings a song in the film: Guys navy. However, according to the first wife of Hergé, Germaine Kiekens , the name "Haddock" comes from the English fish dish, the smoked haddock. However, the name Haddock is a real surname in English, examples such as Sir Richard Haddock (1629-1715) ordered the Royal James at the Battle of Solebay. His second son, Nicholas Haddock followed the career of his father. In addition, Herbert James Haddock (1861-1946) was commander of the White Star Line and the Titanic among others in the technical tests before delivery to the transatlantic company, and then the sister ship of the Titanic, the Olympic.
Drunkness
Captain Haddock was a drunkard, Which is one of his weaknesses. He hates drinking anything that doesn´t contain alcohol, like water. He did make attampts to shake this habit, even becoming the president of the Society of Sober Sailors , a seafarers equivalent to Alcoholics Anonymous. However, when Professor Calculus invented the pills to make consumption of alcohol unpleasant in Tintin and the Picaros , this weakness was gone.
Names
Captain Haddock has a large amount of names hne isyvocabularyells many when he wishes to insult.
Bianca's Names
Bianca Castafiore has trouble remembering Haddock's last name and has created many new names, below is a list:
Addock, Capslock, Kapok, Bangkok, Bartok, Fatstock, Drydock, Hopscotch, Stopcock, Hammock, Paddock, Hassock, Havoc, Maggot, Bootblack, Balzac, Bedsock, Padlock, Hatbox, Stockpot, Harrock, and Hemlock.
One reason why Bianca Castafiore always has trouble saying Haddock's last name correctly may be because when they first met in the book The Calculus Affair, Haddock was unable to say his name correctly:
Castafiore: Aha, you little flatterer, so you've come to congratulate me, with this... fisherman... Mr? ... Mr?...
Haddock: Er... Hoddack...er.... Haddad... Excuse me, Haddock.
In Tintin and the Picaros, Professor  Calculus calls Captain Haddock "Capock Hatpin" and Tintin "Tin Tack."
And he will say it,
"Tintack!...Capock Hatpin!...Terrible news!...Dreadful! 
