Jean Paul Marat in Scotland c.1762 - 1787 - Research Pages 2
Jean Paul Marat in Scotland c.1762 - 1787
Jean Paul Marat in Scotland c.1762 - 1787
            On the 4 March 1793 The Star newspaper in London published an extraordinary story:
GLASGOW. From an investigation lately taken at Edinburgh, it is said, that MARAT, the celebrated orator of the French National Convention, the humane, the mild, the gentle MARAT, is the same person who a few years ago taught tambouring in this city [Glasgow], under the name of John White. His conduct while here was equally unprincipled, if not atrocious, as it has been since his elevation to the Legislatorship. After contracting debts to a very considerable amount he absconded, but was apprehended at Newcastle and brought back to this city, where he was imprisoned. He soon after executed a summons of cessio bonorum against his creditors, in the prosection of which, it was found, that he had once taught at the academy at Warrington in which Dr. Priestly was tutor; that he left Warrington for Oxford, where, after some time, he found means to rob the Museum of a number of gold coins and medallions; that he was traced to Ireland, apprehended at an assembly there in the character of a German Count, brought back to this country, tried, convicted, and sentenced to some years hard labour on the Thames. He was refused a cessio, and his creditors, tired of detaining him in jail, after a confinement of several months, set him at liberty. He then took up his residence in this neighbourhood, where he continued about nine months and took his final leave of this country about the beginning of the year 1787. He was very ill-looked; of diminutive size; a man of uncommon vivacity, of a very turbulent disposition, and possessed of a very uncommon share of legal knowledge. It is said, that while here, he used to call his children MARAT, which he said was his family name.
            This tale of Jean Paul Marat (1743-1793) masquerading as John White was considered by E. B. Bax in his 1909 biography Jean Paul Marat: the People's Friend and dismissed as too far-fetched. Sydney L. Phipson examined evidence for Marat's time in England [sic] in a series of articles in Notes and Queries in 1922, that became a book; Jean Paul Marat; his career in England and France before the Revolution, published in London in 1924. As well as discussing another alias believed to have been adopted by Marat; Mr. le Maitre, he introduced a forgotten element into the story, referring to a series of articles on the history of Warrington Academy, written by William Turner (1761-1859) and published in Vol. 7 of The Monthly Repository… for 1813 (London 1812). Phipson came to the conclusion that in the 'balance of probabilities' John White, Mr. le Maitre and Jean Paul Marat had been one and the same person. In 1934, J. M. Thomson in a carefully researched paper 'Le Maitre, Alias Mara' looked at the evidence for the story of the theft of coins from the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford in 1776 by Peter le Maitre, said to be Jean Paul Marat, and published it in the English Historical Review. He concluded that the le Maitre - Marat connection was 'not proven'. In recent years the John White story has simply been dismissed, by Clifford D. Connor in Jean Paul Marat Scientist and Revolutionary (1997) and by Charlotte Goëtz-Nothomb and Jacques De Cock in numerous recent papers published in Chantier Marat between 1998 and 2011. Their greatest contribution however has been to publish fully referenced articles that gather together the work of scholars in France, Sardinia and Russia to explore the Mara family history in detail and set aside some of the unhelpful mythology that has grown up, especially since the development of the Internet. The section here on the Mara family draws heavily on their online resources.
            In all of the research noted above it is surprising that no-one thought to check the records of the Scottish Court of Session in the National Archives of Scotland where the present author found important and significant material on the John White case. The discovery of these papers led in turn to other papers in the Strathclyde Archives and this article will discuss all of this new evidence, relating it to the published biographical material on Jean Paul Marat. Evidence will be presented which suggests very strongly that John White was indeed Jean Paul Marat and a review of J. M. Thomson's conclusions in the light of the new evidence, confirms that John Peter le Maitre was one of a number of alias of the French revolutionary. But as E. B. Bax demanded in 1909, why on earth would a respectable doctor in the service of the Comte d'Artois in 1777 end up as an embroidery teacher in Glasgow ten years later? It will be seen that the possibility is no more surprising than the chasm in the biography of Marat, between the scientist/doctor, explored by Clifford D. Conner and the enfante terrible of the French Revolution who with others, orchestrated Louis XVI being put to the guillotine, a few days before the newspaper report in 1793. Finally, the new evidence presented here will illuminate the dilemma at the centre of an otherwise very helpful paper 'Doctor Jean-Paul Marat (1743–93) and his time as a physician in Great Britain' by J. R. Silver and M. F. Weiner published by the Royal College of Physicians in Edinburgh.
The Mara family.
            Jean Paul's father Jean Mara was born in Cagliari on the east coast of Sardinia in 1704 and in 1720 he joined the Mercedarian order of friars where he became a deacon in 1726. Between 1737 and 1739 he was involved in a project to set up a school in Bono in central Sardinia but fell out with the order in an argument over taxation. The details of the disagreement do not throw any light on what must have been a more deep seated unhappiness, because on the 7 October 1740 Jean Mara appeared before the Chamber of Proselytes in Geneva and on the 13th, renounced his catholic faith before the Venerable Consistory. On the 18 November he came before the Consistory again, asking for assistance in learning to draw. On the 21 December 1740 he registered a promise to marry Louise Cabrol of Geneva (of a Huguenot family from Castres in the Languedoc) and on 10 March 1741 he made a formal request to become a citizen of the city. On the 19th he married the sixteen year old Louise who, unable to write, put her mark on the document of registration. In July the couple applied to live in Yverdon on the banks of Lake Neuchatel; a town with a thriving tourist industry based on its thermal springs where Jean proposed giving 'drawing lessons'. A child, Marianne-Françoise, believed to be their first, was baptised here on the 2 May 1742. The couple then moved to Boudry in 1743 where Jean Paul, the subject of this article was baptised on 7 June, followed by two further children, Henri (1745) and Marie (1746). In 1754 the family moved to Neuchâtel where three further children were born, David (1756), Albertine (1760) and Jean Pierre (1767). Political unrest may have forced the family back to Geneva in 1768 where Marat's mother died in 1782 and his father the year after.
            Jean Mara senior worked as a designer and it seems very likely that Louise Cabrol worked as a fabric painter in one of the many calico factories established in the area of Neuchatel in the first half of the 18th century; by Jean Jacques de Luze at Biel in 1734, Pierre Cartier at Poissine in 1739 and many others. Jean Mara is recorded as a draughtsman at the factory established in Boudry by Daniel and Marc Clerc in 1741. Designers or draughtsmen (almost exclusively men) often worked from home while children or very young women laboured on a simple production-line of cloth rolled in front of them, using a small brush to lay, for example, yellow dye over a printed blue, to create a green. Known as pencillers or pinceauteuses they were the backbone of the production of magnificent chintzes or 'Indiennes'. In what was a strongly demarcated profession, Jean Paul would almost certainly have been trained in design by his father. Swiss Indiennes had long been smuggled into France where an edict prevented the production of printed calico but in 1759 this law was scrapped and the market for these fabrics collapsed. For any young designer this was the moment to take stock, retrain and, if possible, travel in search of new ideas.
Marat leaves home.
            According to his own published accounts, Jean Paul Marat left home to travel in 1759 and spent some time in Bordeaux, as a tutor in the house of Paul Nairac a wealthy protestant shipping and sugar merchant and slave trader, a descendent of the noble house of Luzies. After two years he is said to have moved to Paris where, although there is no documentary evidence, he is believed to have studied at the University there. After two years 'the desire to attain a solid grounding in the sciences and to avoid the dangers of dissipation prompted me to move to England. There I became an author….' Interestingly there is a published letter of 13 December 1763, addressed to the printer of the St James's Chronicle (London) in which the writer begins;
Sir, Reading lately Helvetius's Essays on the Mind, I was wonderfully pleased with the following advice given, at the request of an eastern King, by his brother.
He then recounts the story and ends;
Whoever, under pretence of supporting the authority of his sovereign, would stretch it to an arbitrary power, is at the same time, a bad father, and a bad citizen, because he would load his posterity and his country with the Chains of Slavery; and a bad subject, because by changing a lawful for an arbitrary authority, he is summoning up ambition and despair against a King.
While the words may be traced to Jean Jacques Rousseau (Discourse 1755 and The Social Contract 1762) the voice and the philosophy is very much Marat and he would publish his first political work, The Chains of Slavery in 1774.
            There is evidence in diary of the artist Joseph Farrington that Marat spent some time in artistic circles in London. Farington only wrote the entries in 1793 when Marat became famous (or infamous, depending on your opinion of the man) and they were reported to him by the architect, Joseph Bonomi (1759-1808) and the painter William Hamilton (1751-1801), relating to events that took place almost twenty years previously. However, Farington recorded some interesting statements - that Marat cured Bonomi of severe complaints, twice or three times; that he borrowed £500 from the artist Antonio Pietro Zucchi (1726-95) [even on a modest estimate, this is an enormous sum - for Zucci to lend and for Marat to borrow - almost £32,000 today] that he couldn't afford to repay and that he;
… was called Dr. Marat, and never professed himself to be in any but the Physical line. His object appeared to be improving himself by consulting the practice in different countries. In June 1774 he went to Edinburgh, and returned in 1775. He there took a degree, or so he said. While he resided in this country, in what related to politicks, he was called a Wilkite, and was very eager in defending, in conversation, all opposition to Government…. Zucchi had the highest opinion of his abilities. Being a man of extensive classical reading, Marat continually proposed subjects which he had selected for Zucchi to design.
Farringdon further recorded that 'He was a little man… slender but well made, of a yellow aspect, and had a quick eye. He had a great deal of motion, seldom keeping his body or limbs still. He was thin, discontented, and abused the establishments which existed'. It is very significant but previously un-noticed that both Bonomi and Zucchi were draughtsman in the London office of the Scottish architect, Robert Adam (1728-92).
            Farringdon's description relates to a later period in Edinburgh but there is evidence for at least two possible candidates called John White or Whyte at an earlier date that could well be Jean Paul Marat. The first of these attended William Cullen's chemistry class in 1762 suggesting attendance between October 1761 and June/July 1762. Cullen would have attracted Marat with his hands-on experiments for young men interested in practical solutions in manufacturing industries. By 1762 Cullen already had an international reputation and a practical knowledge of dyes and mordants that Marat may have been seeking. Most students in the University spent two years in study, often, as in the case of anatomy, simply repeating the same course again. John White does appear again in 1762-3, matriculating in Anatomy, surgery, Chemistry 2 and Pharmacology 1, but in the records on this occasion he is noted 'Hibernus', i.e., from Ireland. Was this another young man or was this simply what he told the authorities - Mara or O'Mara being a common Irish name? If so, this evidence suggests he studied with Cullen again and with other luminaries of the Scottish Enlightenment, the anatomist father and son, Professors Alexander Monro primus and secundus and Dr. John Hope. All of these men taught practical skills, in English and John Hope, the King’s Botanist in Scotland and Keeper of the Physic Garden at Holyrood Palace, was in the process of establishing a botanical garden in Leith Walk in 1763. He had a specific interest in teaching students to draw and to apply their knowledge in manufactures, an interest that Monro had developed in the University from 1728 with the designer, Richard Cooper (1701-1764).
            Marat's first brush with British justice may have occurred shortly after leaving the University in 1764 as there is a tantalising reference to a young cloth worker called 'John White, late of Leeds' spending time in prison in York prison in June 1765. He found himself there after contracting a debt with a local woollen manufacturer that he was unable to pay but he appears to have escaped before being called to account. If this was indeed the same man then he was back in Edinburgh by November when the minutes of Canongate Kilwinning Lodge record the visit of [blank] 'White, medical student' on 12 November 1766. If Jean Paul Marat did indeed attend Edinburgh University as John White,  his qualifications for medical practice were equal to or better than  those of his peers and the stage was set for a glittering career in  science or medicine.
            Farringdon's diary records that the architect Joseph Bonomi told him that the artist Antonio Zucchi met Marat in Old Slaughter's  Coffee house in St. Martin's Lane, London in about 1767-8. He said he  looked about 30 years of age and called himself Dr. Marat, all of which is perfectly compatible with the evidence for a first period of study at Edinburgh University. While Marat may have had the necessary qualifications to practice as a doctor he still lacked the necessary capital to establish himself in the metropolis and this may explain the potentially crippling loan from the artist Zucchi. The realisation that he could not repay the money must have been destabilising, although there is a hint of collaboration between the two men that could have had some monetary value.  A respectable course would have been to teach and this possibility was followed up by Sydney L. Phipson in 1924, revisiting the articles on the history of Warrington Academy, written by William Turner, published in 1812. The evidence is not straightforward and there is a confusion of aliases, but it appears that in September 1769 a Mr. Fantin Latour, a native of France, took  up post as teacher of French at Warrington Academy in Birmingham, who was replaced by a man called Guery in 1772. Another version states that they  had difficulties appointing someone and that a M. le Maitre, alias Mara  was appointed but he, along with Latour and Guerry did not stay very  long. This is the first appearance of the Le Maitre alias and the date is significant as this impersonation may have been a show of solidarity with Pierre Jacques Le Maitre (b. 1740), imprisoned in the Bastille for his activities as a pamphleteer in 1772-3. [Doyon, André, Un agent royaliste pendant la Révolution: Pierre-Jacques Le Maître (1790-95), Paris, 1969].
            Returning to Farrington's diary we then find that Mara returned to Edinburgh in 1773/4 and 1774/5 once again appearing as John White in the records, to study Anatomy, Surgery, Chemistry, Matera Medica, Botany and Medical Practice with Professors Alexander Monro secundus and Joseph Black, Dr. John Hope and Dr. James Gregory. Such a course would have brought him into contact with some of the greatest medical minds of the eighteenth century and an association with Joseph Black (1728-1799) would be particularly telling as he was born in Bordeaux, the son of a wine merchant from Belfast. That Mara studied anatomy, and for a considerable period, is beyond doubt. It is only necessary to read his Philosophical Essay on Man (1773) and his contributions to L'Ami du peuple to see how his experience in the anatomy theatre influenced his thinking. (See the Dissertation by David Kammerman, 'Making the Cut: Medical, Political, and Textual Bodies in Seventeenth and Eighteenth-century France' USC 2006). Gregory and Monro secundus were also at the forefront of studies in comparative anatomy, Gregory publishing his Comparative View of the State and Faculties of Man, with those of the Animal World in 1765. If Jean Paul Marat did advise the Comte d'Artois on the medical condition of his horses, while employed as his physician, an occurrence that is often cited as evidence of his quackery, then he was in very good company; William Cullen performed the same function for the Duke of Hamilton and his family.
            Marat may have been drawn to Edinburgh by family connections that have never been explored and which require a great deal more research. As noted above, Marat's mother was Lousie Cabrol, a family name to be reckoned with in the history of medicine as far back as the 16th century. Bartholomew Cabrol (1529-1603) professor of anatomy at Montpelier University, published an early treatise on anatomy, Alphabet Anatomic... in 1594. During research for this article wills or testaments for two members of the Cabrol family were found in England -  Peter Cabrol (d? 1714) and his brother Daniel Cabrol (d. 1750). (National Archives Prob. 11/784 and 11/540). Peter's  testament mentions (their father?) 'Mr. Peter Cabrol of Castres' the town where Marat's mother was born. Farrington's description of the young Marat includes the often repeated indications of poor health and irritation, said to have been caused by a skin condition. Enough has been said on this subject by others but it may also be the case that Marat was drawn to Edinburgh by the reputation of its medical men, propagated throughout Europe by the publication of the Medical Essays in the decade after 1735 and translated into French, German and Dutch if the decade following. The sad litany of early child deaths recorded here for Marat and his partner suggest very strongly that he and wife suffered from syphilis. The pattern is unmistakable.
           
Marat makes a living.
            One solution for a young man of limited means was to find a rich widow or a well endowed, unmarried sister and there is just a hint that Marat may have followed this course. Marat would have been a contemporary of William Buchan (1729-1805) at Edinburgh, a man who qualified as MD in 1769, became a Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1772 and published one of the most popular medical texts of the eighteenth century, his Domestic Medicine in 1769. It sold more than 80,000 copies and went through 22 editions. Interestingly, Buchan's main subject of research was child mortality. On the 12 May 1770 a John Whyte married Helen Buchan at Crief in Perthshire, an important linen and woolen manufacturing centre in Scotland'. They had two sons, William and John, christened at Muthill, in the same parish, in 1771 and 1772 but after that date there is no trace of them in the records. It may be no more than coincidence that Dr. William Buchan was one of those who sponsored Marat when he was granted the degree of Doctor of Medicine by the  University of St. Andrews. This was awarded on payment of a fee and without  examination. Marat is also believed to have translated Buchan's Domestic Medicine into French. If Marat did indeed marry Helen Buchan in 1770, she and possibly her children were deceased by 1774 when he wrote to Dr. John Aikin (1747-1822) in May that year, proposing that Aikin should be his authorised English translator and going on to suggest a marriage with Aikin's sister (later Mrs. Barbauld). Money was not far from his mind; he  also referred to the sale of a pamphlet which 'more than paid for his  incidental expences' and this was probably his Plans for International scientific Academies in London and Edinburgh. Once again there is a significant connection as Aikin published his Thoughts on Hospitals in 1775 with the preface dated at Warrington where he was working as a surgeon.
            Marat published his most famous work, The Chains of Slavery in 1774 and for all his well documented bluster, it did not sell very well. He ostentatiously presented copies to various institutions in Newcastle and later said that such was the fuss over the publication that he had to flee to Holland and return to England via Berwick, Newcastle  and Carlisle. There is no evidence that any of this was true and it may indicate, more than anything else, Marat's inability to cope with failure and the possibility of financial ruin. In fact, the next piece of evidence does indeed suggest a marriage at this time. On the 5 August 1775, 'Mrs Le Maitre' placed an advertisment in Jacksons Oxford Journal, stating that she had removed to Mr. Tubb's, Grocer, in the Corn Market Oxford where she continued 'to carry on the tambour business in all its branches'. Her notice finished with a flourish: 'Ladies taught tambour by Mrs le Maitre and drawing by Mr le Maitre'. There is a further reference to this lady (the source of which I have now mislaid but which I recall was by a French scholar who gave no references for his statements) on 12 August 1775: 'Mr and Mrs Peter Le Maitre appear in Oxford,  'near the back gate of Exeter College' and their first[?] child Henry is  born and he dies in 26 August, son of Peter Le Maistre, draughtsman and  Mary, his wife.  His wife offered tambouring and he drew the designs  for her and taught drawing to ladies and French'. These are the earliest references to the appearance of Marat in Oxford, as a prelude to the well known story of the theft of coins from the Ashmolean Museum, at the beginning of February 1776, so well researched by J. M. Thomson and published in the English Historical Review in 1934. This story can also be followed on my Chronology where I have placed copies of many of the newspaper reports mentioned by Thomson. Suffice it to say here that Le Maitre/Marat was imprisoned in Oxford Castle pending transfer to a prison ship or 'hulk' on the Thames and while there, he made an attempt to escape in April 1777. On the 15th he was transferred to the hulk. Thomson also found the extraordinary evidence that Le Maitre/Marat almost certainly escaped from the hulk with a group of others when a lighter on which they were working was driven onto the bank by high winds. Among the papers in the National Archives of Scotland discussed here there is a deposition from the master of the hulk, who claims that he saw Marat there. He claims that the prisoner spent four years on the hulk, making no mention of the escape -a point for debate.
And saith that the  said Peter Lametre, after remaining about four years on board the said  Hulk pursuant to his sentence and commitment, was discharged; after  which this Deponent heard and believes that he opened a Tambour School  at Woolwich in Kent, and that He and a Sailor's wife who also kept a  school at Woolwich, eloped and ran off together; and this Deponent  afterwards heard they were at Hull, and is informed and believes they  are now at Glasgow in Scotland, and that the said Peter Lametre about  three months ago eloped from Glasgow, leaving the Sailor's Wife there
            If it is assumed that Marat did indeed escape and rejoined his wife then a sequence of evidence suggests that he is indeed the man who then appeared in Glasgow. On 20 June 1777 a child Robert was christened at Hornby by Bedale in Yorkshire to John Whyte or White and Eleanor [blank] - a registration that began a sequence of christenings and births recorded for this couple that correspond very closely to the movements recorded in the NAS documents. No marriage registration has been found for the couple. The next birth is recorded on 20 July 1781 at Croxton in north Yorkshire, just south of Hull. In his statement to the Court of Session on the 24 November 1786, John White noted that he had worked in the tambouring business 'in several manufacturing towns in  both England and Ireland and for two years before he came to Scotland,  he wrought at Hull'. The next registration is indeed in Hull on the 2  December 1782 John White and Eleanor [blank] had a a daughter, christened 'Louisa Mara White' at the  Fish Street Independent Church, Kingston upon Hull,  Yorkshire on the 28 December. [IGI, extracted from the OPR's] This  is the most significant evidence to tie John White to  Jean Paul Marat. His mother, Louise Cabrol, died in April 1782 and this child was almost certainly named in her memory.
          
            There is no document in the sequence discussed below that  states when John White was released from prison in Glasgow but it may be  inferred from the date of the last document in the sequence that he was  still in prison at the end of February 1787. He may have attended the  christening of his son William (b. 28 May 1787) with his wife Eleanor at  the Old church of St Pancras in London on 1 July that year and indeed,  that setting - the church of choice for the emigre community, could be  seen as a celebration of his freedom.  It is hardly surprising that Marat should write to  the President of the National Assembly in May 1790, explaining that he  had been  seriously ill in 1788, to the point where he felt he was on his  deathbed. But Marat continued to visit  England, even at the height of the Revolution and one of these visits,  after 1 January 1790, may be related to the birth of another child,  baptised in the names of John White and Eleanor [Dewyer?] on 16 April  1790 at Egham in Surrey, with Marat returning to Paris in May. It is  also significant that Edward Mara, a gentleman who may have been related to J. P. Marat, made out his will on the 3 April, 1790, perhaps the  result of ill health. Eleanor may have died shortly after this visit as  Marat married the 26 year old Simonne Evrard in Paris in April 1792, albeit in an irregular ceremony.
The Documents.
            
            The purpose of this article is to present the new manuscript material found in the National Archives of Scotland that relate to the case of the tambour worker, John White. The author believes that John White was indeed Marat and while there is conflicting evidence, this is a conclusion based on the balance of probabilities. These papers begin on the 3 October 1785 with an official copy of a petition to the Sheriff Depute of Lanarkshire by Andrew Brown on behalf of a group of merchants who were owed money by White and who believed he was about to leave Glasgow without paying his debts. They were looking for a warrant of meditatio fugo, a term that would be repeated endlessly in the months that followed. This is followed on 4 November 1786 with a Bill of Advocation taken out by John White, tambour worker in Glasgow against James Robertson, merchant. A Bill of Advocation is an application to the Lords Commissioners of Justiciary in Edinburgh, asking that the proceedings in an inferior criminal court may be brought under review of the Court of Justiciary. The practice would be for lawyers to debate and finally discuss the whole merits of the case upon the bill and during the litigation the personal presence of the parties is not required. All of the arguments were [and still are] carried out on paper.
            In this case, John White asked the Court to review the decisions of the Magistrates of Glasgow who had granted a request for a warrant of meditatio fugoe [there are many spellings] against him. The warrant had been raised by James Robertson in the belief that White, who owed him money, was about to leave the country. The documents in the case are long and often tedious in their repetition of the case, as each side presents the evidence against the other. The case is interesting for the way in which White submits material that really has no bearing on the case but which illuminate his character in a remarkable way. The normal practice in the Scottish Courts would be for the litigants to employ a writer or lawyer to write down their arguments and this is what occurs here. However, at one point the lawyer for Robertson notes;
Mr. White is himself the writer of all his own papers, at least in the Inferior Courts, and your Lordships will presently see that his talent lys in telling dismal lamentable stories.
            There is no evidence in the manuscripts that White wrote any of his own papers for this Court but he clearly dictated the arguments and his voice is quickly apparent and his characteristic emphasis in the underlining. His arguments can be long winded but this is not very unusual for the date, just tedious for the lawyers who had to read it all out. How he could afford to pay for a lawyer is an interesting point and it is noteworthy that he has at least three writers, the first Will McPherson acting, according to an inscription, 'gratis' or free, his second is William Whyte and the third is John Wright.
            The documents presented here speak for themselves and it is important to realise that they are incomplete. They are transcribed here in different colours to make it easier to follow the case - John White in green and James Robertson in blue. The biographical material has been highlighted in bold along with embellishments to that material in later documents in the sequence. Some observations will be added in the right column along with references to material that has not been published in other sources.
This is the petition to the Magistrates that began the entire process, 3 October 1785:
Unto the Sherriff Depute of Lanarkshire or his substitute.
The petition of Andrew Brown, auctioneer in Glasgow as agent & attorney for Crosses, Rutherford & Co, merchants in Glasgow, David Young, merchant there, William Mudie, merchant there, Coats Lockhart& Co., merchants there, James & Matthew Mackenzie & Co, merchants there, James & John McIlquham, manufacturers there, David Paterson, Insurance Broker in Edinburgh, Selby Hogg for Copland Sweet & Co., merchants there, James Robertson, bleacher at the Town miln [mill] conform to a letter of attorney produced.
Humbly showeth, That John Whyte [spellings of names change, even within the same document here], tambourer at the Town Miln of Glasgow stands justly addebted & owing to the petitioners constituents aforesaid, sundry sums of money as particularly specified in their respective affidavits, herewith produced [they do not survive with these documents] amounting in whole to the sum of Three hundred & fifty two pounds three shillings & five pence. That the said John Whyte has within these few days past deserted his dwelling house and in a clandestine manner packed up and carried away his stock of goods and effects and is as the petitioner has good reason to suspect about to go beyond seas without paying the said debts and with a purpose to defraud his creditors.
May it therefore please your Lop to grant a warrant to the officers of the Shire ... to search for, apprehend & imprison the person of the said John Whyte within the Tolbooth of Glasgow or other sure prison...
[The Court requested that Andrew Brown appear and sign a statement to effect that they believed John Whyte was about to flee. He did so on 3 October 1785 and the warrant was issued. This is the warrant presented to the Justice of the Peace, James Rudman at Newcastle upon Tyne on 6 October 1785 and who gave authority for the arrest in the County. The document is signed at the end: 'What is wrote on the above and three preceeding pages is a true copy attested by me, John Lawson, Jaylor' (at Glasgow Tolbooth)].
Bill of Advocation for John White against James Robertson, 4 November 1786.
My Lords of Council and Session. Unto your Lops.
    Humbly complains your servitor John Whyte late Tambour Worker in Glasgow present prisoner in the Tolbooth thereof. That I am detained in prison on a warrant as in meditatione fugo at the instance of James Robertson Merchant in Glasgow and others my creditors and being unable to maintain myself in jail, where I have lain since October 1785, burdened with a wife and children; I applied to the Magistrates of Glasgow to have my aliment modified to me in terms of the Act 1696, or to be set at Liberty. On considering this petition on the 15th March last the Magistrates modified me an aliment of 4d per day, which they were afterwards pleased to increase to 6d. My wife and family and myself being noways able to subsist ourselves and I having a child starved to death for want of subsistence, and my wife recently brought to bed of another child, and she lying at the point of death, without my being able to spare her anything to support her life from the scanty aliment modified to me. I was induced by this peculiar distress to prefer a petition to the Magistrates craving that they would augment my aliment to 1s a day or to such other sum as should seem meet to themselves. This petition was only opposed by one of my creditors the foresaid James Robertson, who is the only creditor who has chosen to aliment me and who as shall be afterwards shown, from motives the most interested and inhumane, and a conduct cruel in the extreme, holds me in jail by his fugo warrant until I agree to comply with his terms, which are no other, than my enacting myself to leave the country and banish myself and family for life. This gentleman in his answers to my petition braded me with the most scurrilous and illiberal abuse, and laid to my charge, crimes and offences of the blackest dye. A copy of this extraordinary answer is herewith produced for your Lops perusal, and therein you will find he alleged I was guilty of notorious crimes and frauds "that I was imprisoned on board the Hulks in the Thames as a convict". That Mr Robertson having entered into a copartnery trade with me in the Tambour working a number of young girls were procured as apprentices to the company "and complaints being continually made of their bad treatment and my attempts to seduce and debauch some of them," he, Mr Robertson put an end to the concern - that I then took in goods from divers manufacturers on pretence of tambouring them with which I  fled to England from whence I was brought back and lodged in prison where I have been since detained "in consequence of various charges both for crimes and frauds as well as for debts". How or whether the Magistrates  were inclined to believe these allegations I cannot say, but on advising my application with Answers and Replies they pronounced the following Interlocutor (1st November 1786) "Refuses the desire of the petition adheres to the sentence by which the petitioners aliment was modified to six pence per diem and decerns and declares accordingly". Of this interlocutor I humbly beg your Lops review and I am hopeful your Lordships on considering my case will not only remitt to the Magistrates to increase my aliment, but direct them to give me some redress for the highly improper manner in which Mr. Robertson has been pleased to attack my character in his answers, with direct charges of the blackest crimes, not only totally unsupported  but as I shall now show your Lops. Contradicted by evidence the most unexceptionable. To the allegation that I was imprisoned as a convict in England Indeed I can give no other answer than that the accusation is most groundless and unsupported by evidence. It may indeed be further observed on this head that what Mr. Robertson himself says in his Answers page 1st that he became acquainted and was concerned with me "through the application of a correspondent in the north of England" is inconsistent with my having been a convict on the Thames. Your Lordships will please be informed that after I had continued sometime in partnership with Mr Robertson and instructed him and the apprentices in the secrets and art of tambouring, he wishing to appropriate the whole profit to himself, to dissolve the copartnery and at the same time to retain the whole apprentices to himself, gave in an application to the Baillies of Glasgow setting forth several charges of improper conduct in me, and particularly of my having maltreated the female apprentices and seduced and debauched them and craving to have the copartneryship dissolved and the apprentices declared to belong to him. An investigation was taken by the Magistrates and the following exculpatory of my conduct was pronounced on the 10th November 178[5]:
"Having considered the pursuers petition of the 24th September last, Missive letter of copartnery produced, Answers for the defender, Replies for the pursuer with the depositions and declarations of the witnesses adduced for the parties respectively, memorial for the defender of the 1st of November current and Answers thereto, finds that the pursuer has brought no proof of any maltreatment by the defender of his apprentices or corrections inflicted by him upon them sufficient to justify this process or the conclusion of the prayer of said petition nor any proof that complaints were made by the parents of said apprentices of their being maltreated by the defender, or that the pursuer was desired or required by the said parents to raise this process. On the contrary finds it proved that the defender has bestowed great care and attention upon the religion, morals and general behaviour of the said apprentices and in properly clothing, feeding and lodging them and that he has inflicted no severe corrections upon them than what was necessary for maintaining suitable order and decorum in his family and propriety of behaviour from said apprentices to each other: Therefore assoilzies the defender from this action and finds the pursuer liable to him in the expence of process which modifies the £10 12s sterlg from which decrees and for the expence of extracting & reserving to the defender his right of insisting against the pursuers for damages incurred by him from lose of time or otherways in any competent action as accords with law and in respect there are many expressions in the second, third and eighth pages of the said replies (which are now marked by black strokes under the lines of them) which are injurious to the defender's character unconnected with the merits of this process and disrespectful to the Court, ordains the said expences to be erased from the debate but as they may still remain legible fines and emmerciates John Lang, writer in Glasgow by whom the replies are subscribed in ten shillings sterling for the use of the poor &c. and ordains the said John Lang to be imprisoned till he makes payment of the same".
    It could scarcely been imagined that Robertson and his doer, Lang (whom your Lops will observe subscribes the present answers) would have been so horridly malicious and daring as to repeat the criminal charges against me in a paper before the same court, after the foresaid ample exculpation in my favour, and it is no less strange that they should have been permitted by the Magistrates to do so without censure. They could not but be sensible of the impropriety, injustice and danger of such conduct, but they might probably consider me worn out by misfortune, apprehension and poverty as I now am, incapable of affording the means of procuring redress and that their resentment might be indulged with impunity. But I trust in the Justice of your Lordships (before whom I am enabled to lay my cause without experience), that I will receive all due redress. It was equally unjustifiable in Mr Robertson to assert that I ran off with other people's goods and am detained in prison in consequence of charges for crimes and frauds. Was the assertion true that I lie confined as a criminal it would be a good objection to my receiving any aliment at all. But it is not true. This leads me to explain to your Lordships another species of oppression I have suffered. When Mr. Robertson put an end to the copartnery after the foresaid judgement of the Baillies in my favour, in order to screen himself from the action I intended to raise against him for damages, and to obtain the apprentices to himself by disabling me to carry on business he stirred up several to whom I had run in debt to distress me by diligence, to avoid which I was obliged to leave the country and go to London to do business, where I intended to continue till I had saved as much money as would have enabled me to return, pay off my debts and seek reparation from Mr Robertson. However Mr Robertson who cared not for expence where his resentment was to be gratified, obtained some of my creditors to bring me back from Shiells to Glasgow and then a petition was presented in name of Mr. Robertson and others his friends charging me with fraud & swindling, and praying to have me incarcerated till liberated in due course of law. The prayer of this petition was instantly granted; and I being unable to find caution, had no other remedy than forcing on my trial in order to establish my innocence. My accusers however being sensible of the injustice of their charge, did not appear to support it, and I was discharged from the criminal warrand by running my letters in order to tryal in terms of the statute. This being the case I submit to your Lordships by what justice I am branded a criminal by Mr. Robertson, and if he is entitled to accuse me of crimes, which he has acknowledged by not going on to evidence them in the fair trial I challenged him to bring, had no foundation in fact, and in this situation I am as fully acquit of these crimes as if I had a verdict of my Country in my favour. It would be endless to enumerate all the injustice, cruelty and oppression I have suffered from Mr Robertson. He is afraid that a day of reparation may come and is anxious to prevent it. He therefore lately proposed to me that if I would enact myself to leave the country for life to liberate me. My distressing and painful situation and a regard for my family who might otherways starve, induced me at first to agree to give a private obligation to him to quit the country; but when I was told by Mr Robertson that I must give in a petition to the Magistrates confessing crimes of which I am entirely innocent and craving to be liberated with consent of Mr Robertson on voluntary banishment My mind revolted at the idea of debasing my character and disgracing my family and I determined sooner to perish in this Dungeon with hunger, than purchase my liberty at such a dear rate. As I am unable to find caution in terms of the fugo warrant, I am necessitated to apply to your Lordships for an increase of aliment which I am humbly hopeful your Lordships will grant me. The aliment usually modified to debtors both in Glasgow and Edinburgh is from sixpence to sixteen pence per day. Each day I ly in jail I incur a debt to the jailer of four pence for jail fees and while other debtors are alimented at the rate of one shilling a day I am only allowed the one half, tho' I have a wife and two infant to subsist and she is not yet recovered from her child bed sickness. Every principle of Humanity supports my claim to an additional aliment. The oppression and injustice I have met with from my alimentor Mr Robertson,- the wantonly cruel manner he sports with my distress,- the injurious method he has taken and still persists in to blast my character by the unjust imputation of the greatest crimes and the wicked scheme (to call it no worse) to which his views are directed,- all concur to inforce this claim.    
     Therefore  I beseech your Lops for letters of Advocation or rather that your Lops  will remit to the Magistrates with an instruction to augment my aliment  to one shilling per day or to such other sum as to your Lops shall seem  proper and also to give me due redress for the unjust and improper  manner in which my character is attacked in the Answers complained of.  According to Justice, Will McPherson, gratis. [NAS, CS217/5992]
This was followed by Answers for James Robertson:
20 November 1786: Answers for James Robertson and others the creditors of John White present prisoner in the Tolbooth of Glasgow to the Bill of Advocation presented for said John White.
    From the stile of the Interlocutor in this case, which is something more particular than usual, the respondents are sorry to perceive that the calumnys of the complainer have made some impression on the Lord Ordinary. Mr. White is himself the writer of all his own papers, at least in the Inferior Courts, and your Lordships will presently see that his talent lys in telling dismal lamentable stories. Those acts of oppression for example, which fill the present bill of Advocation, have been repeatedly stated in almost the same words in Mr Whyte's own papers, but unsupported as they not only were by any sort of evidence, but disproved, and universally known at Glasgow to be destitute of truth, they have been uniformly disregarded as they will now fall to be, then the facts are explained by these answers. Upon the part of his creditors, there is indeed much reason to complain, but a most extraordinary degree of confidence only, joined to a reliance on his powers of working on the feelings of those who have had access to know particulars could have produced any complaint from Whyte who is certainly one of the most singular adventurers, that has at any time appeared in this country.
    Who or what this Mr Whyte is the respondents have not been able to discover; he certainly is a foreigner, but both his country and his real name have been carefully concealed, because particulars of this sort, would have led to disagreeable inquiries. This name of Whyte, it is believed is almost peculiar to this island, but your Lordships will observe this is only his last assumed name, for his name & character have been repeatedly changed in order to suite the different parts in which he was to appear as an Actor.
    The respondents have not been able to learn, at what time, or in what capacity he came to Britain. The first trace they find of him is in the character of a Painter [this over an erased word] at Oxford. There he remained for some time, but at last having in some department or other, got into the Museum kept at Oxford, a variety of gold medals and other valuable articles were speedily amissing, and Mr Whyte thought it necessary to make a very abrupt departure. What his name was at Oxford the respondents are not informed, but upon intelligence given some time after, he was followed to Dublin, where he was catched playing his part under the name and character of a German Count. Upon this occasion e was brought back to England; and whether it was for the adventure at Oxford, the tricks of the Count, or what else, the respondents know not, but certain it is, that under the name Monsieur La Maitre, he was brought to trial, and condemned to work on the Thames.
    The respondents do not imitate Mr Whyte and speak at random upon this business. General averment without evidence is useless in a Court of Law; but when Whyte was last apprehended at North Shiels upon the occasion to be afterwards particularly mentioned, Mr Brown, one of the principal creditors who was sent after and seized him, found his person familiar to several people there who had seen him on the Thames, and a deposition was emitted before a Justice of the Peace by Mr Joseph Stamp, a shipmaster of Newcastle, who had frequently had opportunities of seeing and conversing with Mr Whyte, because he happened to be in one of the hulks, of which Mr. Stamp's brother in law was commander. The deposition is produced, & is as follows:
Town and County of Newcastle upon Tyne. John Stamp of the said Town and County, shipmaster maketh oath that about five years ago, he several times saw on board the Censor hulk (whereof his brother in law John Marshall was then commander) on the river Thames a certain man of whom of whom this deponent then took particular notice, and who was then and there in the character and station of a criminal convict, and known and called by the name of Lame Tar, his other name this deponent did not then advert to; and this deponent saith that he hath heard that the same man had sometime before he came on board the said hulk, been apprehended in Dublin in Ireland as an imposter pretending to be a German Count; and this deponent saith, that he yesterday saw the same man at North Shields in this port in company with one William Hornby, master of the ship Industry, in which ship this deponent hath heard the same man had embarked for London - and this deponent saith that he again this morning, saw the same man in a boat in the River Tyne in the custody of the deputy water bailiff of this port; and this deponent this afternoon came from Shields to this Town in a coach in company with the said deputy water Bailiff, and the same man, and one Mr Andrew Brown, who this deponent understands came from Scotland in pursuit of the same man, who this deponent hath been informed calls himself John White. Signed Jno Stamp. Sworn the 6th October 1785 before me one of his Majesties Justices of the Peace for the Town and County of Newcastle aforesd.
    How long Mr Whyte remained thus employed, or how he got off from the hulks does not appear; but it is not surprising that he should wish immediately to quit England, and accordingly he had the address to get a letter to the respondent James Robertson, from a friend at Hull; and tho' it since appears he had but a very slight acquaintance of Whyte, yet he was got to recommend him as a fit person for a Glasgow Manufacturer to be concerned with in the branch of tambouring.
    The respondent Mr Robison [sic] having accordingly without further inquiry agreed to the proposal, Mr Whyte appears in Glasgow in the end of the year 1783, and a contract was immediately entered into, the chief articles of which were that Mr Robison [sic] was to advance all the money that was necessary from time to time - and likewise to procure the work for the manufactory - while Whyte on his part undertook to teach a number of young girls, who were to be bound as apprentices to the company.
    In consequence of this agreement a great variety of young girls were immediately engaged, but a very short time began to discover something of the real character of Mr Whyte, and to show Mr Robison the indiscretion of having so rashly connected himself with a stranger. The girls complained not only of cruel and barbarous treatment, but also of the most grossly wicked and indecent conduct upon the part of Whyte. The parents came in a body to Mr Robison the only responsible partner, and he was advised in order to save future difficulties, to state the information ha had received in a complaint to the Magistrates of Glasgow, which prayed them not by any means to turn over the indentures to him, as erroneously set forth in the bill of Advocation, but in general to apply some remedy, if the information should prove true.
    It is certainly fact that Whyte was ultimately assoilzied [to be absolved of guilt] from the complaint; because although some very strong things appeared against him, yet upon the whole there was a defect of evidence. But it is perfectly notorious that this arose from the circumstance that the girls themselves from the nature of the offences, were necessarily the witnesses, and they were afraid to speak out, because they were still in Whyte's house and under his power. It is certain however, that these girls were maltreated - that they both before, and since the discussion of this complaint gave up Whyte alone as the author of their wrongs; and that although from the difficulty of such a proof, and the peculiar situation of the witnesses, Whyte procured absolution, yet every person upon the spot, who had a reason to inquire into the circumstances were perfectly satisfied of the truth of the accusation.
    Soon after this the respondent Mr Robison was successful in getting the company dissolved; which notwithstanding what is said in the bill, has been made a very losing concern to him. The balance owing by Whyte appeared to be £189 10s for which he gave his own obligation, payable at three different instalments, and by the contract of separation became bound to relieve Mr Robison at the hands of the apprentices, all of whom it may be mentioned in passing have since procured their liberty upon various complaints to the Magistrates as appearing by these complaints herewith produced with the proceedings upon them and particularly the interlocutors, which go as your Lordships will observe upon the notoriety of the facts specified in the petitions. A short time after the company was dissolved, some of those very girls who had formerly been examined as witnesses, presented in concurrence with their parents, fresh complaints of Whyte's behaviour, and the facts condescended on were so atrocious, that warrants were immediately granted to apprehend and imprison him till he found bail to stand trial. He was accordingly apprehended, and it appears that upon the 12th September 1785, he found caution not to leave the country for six months.
    It was then Mr Whyte seems to have thought himself long enough in the country, and to have formed the resolution of leaving it in the same hasty manner he had done other countrys, and with this view he set to work, and beside getting in all the goods he could get from the manufacturers upon pretence of tambouring, he likewise bought up a considerable quantity, having got goods and credit for a sum, which joined to Mr Robison's debt made above £700 sterling. These goods he sent off privately for England at various times and in different packages to prevent suspicion, and in order to elude the possibility of recovering in case of pursuit, the packages were directed to a person in the neighbourhood of Newcastle, who was found upon after enquiry never to have had existence. Matters being thus prepared he eloped about the end of September, without having even communicated his intentions at the time to his wife, as appears from a very material letter herewith produced, and which will afterwards be more particularly mentioned.
    His creditors having some days after got notice of his elopement, a warrant was obtained upon the petition of Mr. Andrew Brown for himself and other creditors, and he being sent off to England, was lucky enough to come up with Mr Whyte at North Shields, where he was taking passage for London, and having secured him he was once more brought back to Glasgow. During his absence a letter of his to his wife had been luckily intercepted at the Post Office, in which he informs her of his resolution to go instantly to America with the goods he had thus contrived to get into his possession. Being examined by the Sheriff of Lanark, beside acknowledging the debts, he admitted his having writ the above letter, and he was immediately committed to prison and detained upon four different meditatio fugo warrants, as appearing from certified copies of these, and also from the principal declaration herewith produced.
    After being sometime in prison Mr Whyte applied for the benefit of the Act 1696, and the Magistrates of Glasgow without any appearance on the party of the creditors allowed him an aliment of 4d per day. Not satisfied with this he some time afterwards applied for an addition, and was successful in getting it increased to 6d, which seems to have encouraged him to make the present application for 1s per day.
    There being no end of this, it became necessary for the respondents to oppose this third petition, and the Magistrates having accordingly refused it, Mr Whyte has thought proper to present the bill of advocation now to be answered.
    Upon examination of this bill, there appears nothing which merits any answer, excepting the gross calumny and general averments against Mr Robison, who may venture to say for himself, that his well known character is such as to bar the probability of their truth. At any rate your Lordships will demand better evidence than the mere unsupported oratory of this gentleman, Mr Whyte, whose letter, and other papers produced of his hand writing, show that this kind of declamation is the only stile he ever uses, and that all persons with whom he has to deal, are indiscriminately made the objects of his calumny, without any reason, or the least regard to truth.
    The first fact that is stated in the bill, and which is calculated to strike the mind of a stranger, is that since he went to prison, he had a child starved to death.
    This your Lordships will likewise find stated in his reply to the Magistrates produced with the bill. But can your Lordships believe that any person would be suffered to starve in the Town of Glasgow? Bad as the parent has turned out, there is not so little humanity in Glasgow, as to make such an accident possible, and in this case it is a mere fiction of Mr Whyte. The respondents know, that some time ago, a young infant on the breast died in prison, where Whyte kept his whole family, but this was one of those diseases to which children are peculiarly incident.
    It is impossible there can be any hunger in Whyte's family, for beside the great concealments from his creditors, it is a fact undeniable, that he can with his own hands earn by his business at the rate of 3s per day, and both he and his wife are constantly employed at tambouring in the prison. From the nature of the thing, the Jaylor is the best evidence that can be got on this subject, & the following certificate from him is produced, which proves the gross falsehood of his introductory article of the bill.
Glasgow, 14 November 1786. I John Lawson keeper of the Tolbooth of Glasgow do hereby certify and declare that John White present prisoner in the Tolbooth of Glasgow has since the time he was incarcerated therein generally been employed in tambouring cloths given him for that purpose by different people; and further declared that the said John Whyte had a young child which lately died in prison, but I never understood said child died for want, the child being then nursing. Attested by (signed) John Lawson.
    The next species of oppression which makes a great figure, and is often repeated and rested upon in the bill, is another allegation copied from Whyte's reply, that the respondent Mr Robison detains him in prison with a view to get him to banish himself furth of Glasgow.
    To this it is sufficient to answer that there is no truth in it, and that it is not pretended to be supported by any evidence other than Mr Whyte's own word. The fact is that Mr Whyte has often sent to his creditors and offered to banish himself and glad he would be at this moment to get his liberty upon these terms. But the answer he has uniformly met with was, that till he gave us some satisfaction to his creditors, he could not be liberated. He tells your Lordships, and seems to take great credit for having executed, letters of intimation. But your Lordships will immediately see, that after what they have suffered, it was not the business of his creditors to be at the trouble and expence of bringing him to trial. Their object is to recover his effects; and particularly the goods he ran away with, and they are pretty confident that a fair surrender will ultimately be accomplished by giving effect to their warrants, the nature of which will appear from the certified copies of them produced.
    The only other thing requiring notice in the bill, is what is said about his being last apprehended. Mr Whyte telly your Lordships that he was only going "to London to do business where he intended to continue till he had saved as much money as could have enabled him to return and pay off his debts" etc. He is therefore severe on Mr Robison for being so oppressive as to excite the creditors to send Mr Brown after him, tho' Mr Robison was only one of a great many who joined in that measure.
    But unfortunately Mr White is not aware of the respondents being possessed of the most unacceptable of all proofs relative to the real intentions of his elopement, by the evidence of his own holograph letter, written the day before he was apprehended. [A transcript of the letter follows this document] From it your Lordships will perceive that had not Mr Brown been detached in pursuit of him, he never more would have been seen in Scotland. This letter is curious and interesting in many particulars. Written to his wife and calculated for the inspection of none but her, he throws off the mask and avers his sinister intentions. It likewise, while it displays his artfulness and address, shows him to possess eminently those abilities, which must render such a personage a most dangerous member of society. His talent for declamation too here shines most conspicuous. It is not Mr Robison only and his creditors by whom he has been ill used, but the Magistrates and inhabitants of Glasgow and the whole people of Scotland have oppressed and harassed him in a most extraordinary manner.
    
Speaking accordingly of Scotland he says it is "a country which persecutes strangers and devours the fatherless and widows." In another place he exclaims "what damnable country have I not left behind me; a country which for its baseness and ingratitude triumphs over all that’s known. Actions thought there meritorious, which the savagest of Indians would hold himself disgraced were he guilty of them."
    He then pays his respects to the Magistrates of Glasgow, whom in his manifold holograph papers given into them are constantly flattered and extolled for purity and moderation of conduct.
"From these scenes" (says he) "turn your eyes to the conduct of the Magistrates of Glasgow, stiled fathers and judicious supporters of them who do well. See them adding to my miseries, and in the meanest manner picking as they expected my pocket of what they looked as their own, and in case of refusal libel me" etc.
    But the part of this extraordinary letter, where Mr Whyte openly avers the vilainy of his designs towards his creditors and particularly those from whom he had got goods immediately before his flight, is perhaps more essentially material to the present question, and your Lordships will find it at the bottom of page 4 in these terms. After saying that what what he met with (and particularly from one of the girls, whose parents joined her in the last complaint against him, and whom he stigmatises with the name of a young whore) was too much to bear with patience, he goes on "And being by such a train of oppressions and injustice like the Israelites of old under the Egyptians bondage, I borrowed their jewels of gold and silver to make up all my losses and hardships, and after all, my Nelly and my family are the greatest loser" etc.
    With regard to his future intentions these are likewise specified in the most unequivocal manner; for after making an apology to his wife for having kept every thing secret from her, because, as he says "I knew your heart was too honest, too full of rectitude to consent to the steps I had taken" he informs her, on this account he "concealed all from her, and tore himself from all his earthly joy to try in a far distant clime what fortune will do for him". An after part of the letter is still more explicit upon this head. "I am undertaking, says he, for you and your children's sake, a long and tedious voyage, and comfort myself with the hope of having you in a while with me. Till then I must commit you to the care of Providence, who will protect you from further attempts of the Scotch cruelty. Yet if you permit me to advise, let me entreat you to go to your friends in Ireland, where I shall take care to remit you money for your support; or else if you are bent to stay among those who deliberately have worked our mutual ruin, you'll be supplied with money. I am as yet undetermined in what part of America I shall settle but  no matter where" etc.
    With this important letter before your eyes, it is humbly hoped your Lordships will neither be disposed to listen to those general calumnys and complaints from Mr Whyte, which are unsupported by evidence, nor will he easily persuade you that his views were direct, and that he meant only to go to London, and return as soon as he could raise money to pay his debts. His swindling practices towards his creditors and his resolution to fly to distant climes are avowed, and Mr Whyte cannot pretend to controvert this without at the same time desiring your Lordships not to believe one syllable he writes. Let him delaim as much as he pleases either against the country, or against the individuals - Your Lordships will most probably be the next objects of his attack. But still it is sufficient for the creditors to say that they alone are the sufferers - that they have done nothing but what is strictly legal and what every set of creditors in their place would have done - and that they are entitled to detain Whyte, at least till they are satisfied of his having made a fair and free discovery of his subject.
    With regard to the quantum of aliment allowed by the Magistrates it cannot fail to strike your Lordships that in such a case as this it was incompetent to allow any aliment at all. The Act 1696 applies only to fair and honest debtors imprisoned for civil debts. Here the complainer, if ever man was, is in the predicament of a fraudulent bankrupt, and your Lordships have seen it is upon criminal warrants he is imprisoned and detained. The creditors therefore might upon solid principles have opposed his being allowed anything, and still they mean to advocate upon this ground.
    
    But supposing for a moment that Whyte was a fair and honest bankrupt, reduced by innocent misfortunes, still it will occur that 6d a day is sufficient aliment. It is not the intention of the legislature that debtors should be pampered in prison at the expence of their creditors. Those brave soldiers who fight our battles are obliged to live, and frequently with wives and children, on less than 6d per day and it is a fact undeniable that throughout Scotland the median aliment allowed by Magistrates is 6d. This is the case even with respectable reduced citizens, and when Mr Whyte revolves in his mind the singular history of his life and the adventures, and when your Lordships consider the figure he has made in Scotland, and particularly the evidence of his own letter, t will be impossible to find one favourable circumstance upon which to ground the least pretence for giving him double the quantity of aliment which is generally allowed.
    
    Besides it must not be forgotten that he is gaining a very handsome living in prison, as appearing from the jailer's certificate, which would be sufficient to bar his aliment, even if it were a proper object of the Act 1696, because he could not in terms of that Act pretend to say that he had not wherewithal to maintain himself in jail.
    
    Upon the whole it is humbly hoped that now when the business is properly explained, your Lordships will not hesitate to refuse this bill of advocation with expences. In respect whereof, Nat Montgomerie.
        Before going on to the reply, it is worth pausing to examine the letter, written by John White in North Shields as he waited for a boat to take him to America, probably by way of London. It is interesting that his wife never saw this letter as it was found in his luggage, seized at the time of his arrest and was lodged in the Court with the Answers of James Robertson.
          Shild the 2nd Oct 1785.
Which way shall I go through the painful taske I have on hand? what words shall I make use of to convey to you the dolefull tale without tairing your heart asunder? oh my Nelly I shade tears at the bear thought of leaving you and yet it must be; but not for ever.
Methink I see you absorbed and appealing to heaven for help; and what to me is more distressing; accusing me with perfidy, unjustice and cruelty. Yet if you would but go through my letter with calmness, and when you have reflected on it's contence judge without partiality wither situated as I was I could have acted otherwise.
You know that it was much against your will that you came to Scotland; you know that I was prompted to take that step for th[r?]ough the view of establishing the good of my family and by my industry and care furnish you and your children with every things that were decent and comfortable. Were not my hopes well founded on the faith of a contract with as I thought a man of honour. but alas you know the castratrophe and the sufferings I as well as you endured, by the no less base than villainous treatment I met at the hands of Robertson, who through it [stabed?] my peace; reputation and put the final strock to my ruin: had the effects been only felt by me I would have born'd every difficulty with manly fortitude but how could I behold you my best half and the indearing pledges of our love surviving me bestowing caresses which I felt a reproaches for having brought them in a country which persecutes strangers and devoures the fatherless and widowes: how could I be sensible of their approaching misery without exerting my utmost hability to resque them from it, and let me tell you my Nelly, it was not till I had fought against the streem a long while that I brought myself to think that every thought and consideration should give way that of helping my family in the way I have [pinsed?] when all others when were lost.
No doubt you'll say why did he not acquaint me with all his difficulties and the thoughts that disturbed him I should have soothed his anguish and gently restore in his brest that [rest?] he so much wanted. but my Nelly I knew your heart it was too honest too full of rectitude to consent to the steps I had to take and therefore concealed them all and tore myself from all my earthly joy to try in a far distant clime what fortune will do for me.
My departure was precipitated by the repeated acts of cruelty and injustice [executed?] against me. Wretches who you know were fed by my bounty taken care of with all the tenderness and humanity possible; and even relieved their parents with money when no other help was left them; and what is the return I have met at their hands, why slander calumny oppression; and to crown all at t he eve of ending my days in a goal with the additional torture of seeing you in the same situation languishing with your children and filling present to my eyes until their final closure with all that could render me a compleat wretch: To be ['in danger to be' inserted] dragged as you and I were to a dungeon by the artifies and calumny of a young whore supported by an infamous vilan who under the sanctified character of an elder framed the destruction of those whom he in gratitude should have preyed for[.] one truth that I will not forget and indeed they cannot be having made a deep impression in my heart: from these scenes turn your eyes to the conduct of the Magistrates of Glasgow stile fathers and guardians[,] supporters of them who do well; see them adding to my miseries, and in the meenest manner picking[,] as they expected[,] my pocket of what they looked [upon] as their own: and in case of refusal libel me. Shurely what damnable country I ha have I not left behind me, a country which for its baseness and ingratitude triumph over all that's known[.] actions thought there meritorious which the violent savagest of Indians whold hold himself disgraced were he guilty of them. What pretence had these generous guardians; thus to treat me[.] was it as a reward for having during nigh two years maintained 35 poor children who in all likelihood whold would the most of them have become chargeable to the Session and hospital? no it cannot be, was it as a public mark of approbation and publick thanks for having brought in the country a new branche? impossible. Was it to encourage me to continue my being a constant slave to my public trust and to endeavour forming their mind to virtue and their hands to industry. Ingratitude thy voice in their action is to loud and clamorous to be mistake, and this action shall be made known to stand as a monument of Scotch generosity.
Was I then after spending two years of my time in constant slavery having contracted debts which through the contract between Robertson and me would have been defrayed by him lost all I had and became after the football and but of designed wretches, and at last be stigmated by them; and dragged by the throat as a culprit. no by all that’s sacred it was too much to bear with patience, and being by such a train of oppressions and injustice, like the Israelites of old under the Egyptian's bondage[,] borrowed their jewels of gold and silver made up all my loses and hardships. and after all my Nelly I and my family are the greatest losers. I am undertaking, for you and your children's sake a long and tedious voyage and comfort myself with the hope of having you in a while with me[.] till them I must comit you to the care of providence who will protect you from the further attempts of the Scotch's cruelty.
Yet if you permit me to advise let me entreat you to go to your friends in Ireland where I shall take care to remit you money for your support; or else if you are bent to stay among those who deliberately have wished our mutual ruin, you'll be supplied with money; I am as yet undetermined what part of America I shall settle; no mater were as that industry you have ever seen me make a proper use of shall be employed, to wipe from your eyes those tears of affliction you may have shaded for one for you [?] for our children, in short for our compleet union. I am far from being at ease in my mind I have within my brest thousand fears on your account and my beloved children: but must trust my best friend providence with the charge of watching over you and them, and prey that you may all be preserved from evil and returned to me in dieu time[.] may peace happiness and safety surround you and may you still preserve in your mind tender sentiments for me, and teach my children to prey for their unhappy father.
Adieu my Nelly be as happy as I am wretched. J: W.
24 November [1786]: Replies for John Whyte to the Answers for James Robertson.
    Your lordships order appointing the bill of advocation to be answered on the 9th was so far disregarded by the respondent that the present answer only made its appearance on the 20th. That dispatch therefore which your Lordships very properly considered the complainers peculiar case required, has been dispatched by the respondent and the complainer and his starving family obliged to bear for some days longer the hardships of their situation.
The Answers are introduced by assuring your Lordships that the complainer's talent lies in telling dismal lamentable stories and that the acts of oppression of which he complains are not only unsupported by evidence but disproved and universally known at Glasgow to be destitute of truth.
    It is owing to the inhumanity and oppression of this respondent that the complainer has such a dismal tale to make known. If he had acted towards the complainer by the rules of common justice, or if he had listened to the groans of that misery and wretchedness of which he is the sole cause, the complainer's dismal tale would not have reached your Lordships ears, as there would have been no occasion to appeal to the justice and humanity of your Lordship for redress. The complainer does not wish your Lordship to credit this tale, so far as it is either contradicted or unsupported by evidence, nor does he claim from humanity what justice rejects. However much he has suffered, whatever the extent of his misery, if these sufferings and that wretchedness are the consequences of his villainy and dishonesty, as the respondent would make your Lordships believe, the complainer could give up all claim to redress: but if on the contrary it does appear that Mr Robertson is the author of his sufferings and present wretchedness, the complainer trusts that your Lordship will listen to the moderate request, that Mr Robertson be obliged, while he holds him in jail, to aliment him in such a manner that the family which he has brought to the utmost pitch of misery, may not as one of them has already done, perish thro want. 
    To execute the prejudice against the complainer your Lordships are informed that it has not been discovered who he is, and it is very inconsistently added that he is a foreigner, has gone under different names, assumed first the character of a painter at Oxford and afterwards figured as a German Count in Ireland, from whence he was brought to England, tried under the name of Monsieur La Maitre, and condemned to work on the Thames. It is also said that in the character of a painter at Oxford he got into the Museum there and stole a variety of gold medals and other valuable articles; and for evidence of this your Lordships are referred to an affidavit by a James Rudman. 
    Every word of this description, except that the complainer is a foreigner, when applied to him, is the most callamnious falsehood. He is a native of Germany who came into this country about twenty years ago [1766] when he was a boy of thirteen. He was bred to the business which he has ever since practiced, that of an embroiderer and tambour worker, in which it is allowed he has merit as a workman, and has made some material improvement. He came to England at the request of his brother, who had settled there and he was indebted to him for his education. He has wrought in this line of business in several manufacturing towns in both England and Ireland and for two years before he came to Scotland, he wrought at Hull, where he commenced an intimacy with Mr. Will'm Green, an eminent merchant, the gentleman who recommended him to the respondent. 
    It would be easy for the complainer to instruct this to your Lordship's satisfaction by the production of letters and other writings which were in his possession when he left Scotland in September 1785 but the trunks in which his goods, body clothes and everything else he had in the world were kept, was seized from him at Shiells by Brown who was sent after him by Mr Robertson and when the goods and clothes were sold by his creditors, his letters and other papers were not delivered to him. However, he is lucky enough to be able to produce one letter from Mr. Green which he entreats your Lordship to peruse as showing the friendship and intimacy that subsisted between this gentleman and him.
    The improbability  and inconsistency of the respondents allegations are so obvious that they need not be pointed out, and afford evidence of their falsity. The affidavit of Rudman goes no further than to his belief that the complainer was the same person whom he had seen on board a hulk on the Thames. In fact the complainer neither was nor could be the person alluded to by Rudman, and therefore Rudman must either have mistaken or wilfully sworn to what he knew to be false. He might mistake one man for another at a distance of time - he would not condescend when he saw the person alluded to aboard the hulk, tho' at the time the complainer required him to do so. He then was as he now is inclined to believe that Rudman was brought by Brown to perjure himself to serve a purpose. That purpose will be readily perceived by your Lordships when you are informed that the only warrant Brown had against the complainer was an ordinary meditatione fugo warrant to incarcerate him till he found caution not to leave this country. The complainer was then in England where such a warrant could not have been executed and was of no effect. It became therefore necessary for Brown to hold out the complainer as a criminal, and to obtain the Justice of the Peace of the County to grant authority to apprehend him as such, it was requisite by the practice of England to have an affidavit made to some fact which characterised him as a criminal. Brown himself did not attempt to emit such oath, and this Rudman either induced by the representation of Brown to believe the complainer to be the same person whom he saw on the Thames or by unjustifiable means brought to say so, emitted the affidavit founded on, which is the foundation of the warrant in virtue of which the complainer was brought in irons to Glasgow.
    Here it may be necessary to mention to your Lordships the contents of a card wrote two days after the answers to the bill of advocation by Mr Robert's agent, to the agent who a sense of the complainers unhappy situation led him to give him his assistance in the present business. It is in these words "that in the Answer given in on Monday to John Whyte's bill of advocation it is by mistake said that he was a painter at Oxford, whereas the fact is that he acted there in the character of a barber or hairdresser. In writing the replies therefore Mr Whyte will hold this fact as if it had been properly stated".
    What had led the respondent first to represent the complainer as a painter at Oxford and then seem so anxious to correct this, by holding him out as a hairdresser is not so obvious to the complainer, without the respondent intends to entertain your Lops in his duplies with the adventures of some Oxford Hairdresser and apply them to the complainer. The complainer neither assumed the one character nor the other, nor never was at Oxford in his life. As a painter a person might get access to the museum at Oxford and have an opportunity to carry off gold medals, but it will not be so readily believed that a hairdresser could have such access or opportunity. Probably therefore as the character is a new one, the adventures of that character with which your Lordship may be afterwards entertained, will be equally novel.
    Tho' the complainer does not intend to consume your Lordships time with pointing out the obvious inconsistencies and improbabilities of the story told by the respondent he begs leave just to ask one single question. Can it be believed the complainer, if he had been a convict escaped from his punishment on the Thames, would have chosen to remain in England in such a great town as Hull and have been employed by the chief manufacturers there and recommended by one of them to the respondent as a partner in trades? The thing is incredible, and on the whole of this matter the complainer humbly submits to your Lordship that the respondent ought to be punished in an exampliary manner, for the unjust and infarious attack he thus makes on the complainers character.
    The conduct of the respondent is still more conspicuously and decidedly improper and malicious, in the other charge he makes against the complainer, of his having seduced and debauched his female apprentices. Mr Robertson has still the assurance and injustice to repeat these charges in the present answers, tho' in somewhat softer terms. Every averment however which he has made is disproved by the judgement of the Baillies narrated in the bill of advocation.
    It is not, nor cannot be denied here that is a fair copy verbatim of the judgement. The poverty of the complainers circumstances is the reason why he has not produced an authenticated copy thereof and of the proceedings themselves. Could he have done so your Lordships would have seen a scene of impropriety on the part of Mr Robertson which could not be palliated. Your Lordship would have found, besides what is stated in the judgement, that the witnesses were tampered with to swear falsely and that nothing was omitted, which the most diabolical ingenuity could invent to blast the complainer's character and accomplish his utter ruin. The justice of his cause bore him out and the interposition of providence in behalf of innocence was manifested in checking the consciences of those witnesses, who with Mr Robertson had resolved the complainers ruin; for it is a fact that the witnesses adduced to support that complaint came back afterwards and retracted what they had swore on oath. This fact the complainer asserts on his own recollection and if it is denied, let Mr Roberts produce the extract of the process in his possession whence the truth of it will be known.
    It is still said by Mr Robertson that the girls complained of the complainers cruel and barbarous usage and of most grossly wicked and indecent conduct on his part and that their parents came in a body & complained to him.
    Your Lordships, the complainer humbly trusts, will not allow such unjust accusations to be brought against him by Mr Robertson without censure or punishment. These allegations are proven by the judgement on that complaint to be false in every part. It is there found that no proof was brought that complaints were made by the parents of the said apprentices of their being maltreated by the defender or that the pursuer was desired or required to raise the process "but on the contrary it was found "that he had bestowed great care and attention upon the religion, morals and general behaviour of the apprentices".
    Is the respondent then entitled to tell your Lordhsip that his complaint was well founded and that delicacy and fear prevented them from speaking out of the truth?... … … Does he remember that the girls were on their great oath? and that to conceal the truth was to perjure themselves. They had nothing to dread from the complainer in accusing him if he was guilty, and they had every interest to criminate him. For if it could have been established that he was the atrocious villain which he was represented to be by Mr Robertson, the Magistrates would have liberated them from their indenture and discharge them his service.
    When you Lordship sees Mr Robertson averring and persisting in this most calumnious accusation, disproved by the most unexceptionable of all evidence the judgement of a Court of Law, you will not readily credit him in his other allegations, but impute them to the same resentful spirit which has all along actuated and seems still to actuate his conduct towards the complainer. He may talk of his unblemished character, but it is humbly submitted from what has been stated that he has not much to boast of in this respect.
    It is next said by the respondent that after the copartnery was dissolved fresh complaints were made by his apprentices and the facts were so atrocious that he was incarcerated till he found caution.  The simple fact as to this is, that one of the girls deserted her service, on which the complainer charged her and her father as her cautioner on letters of horning of which a suspension was presented; and during the dependence of that suspension, which did not come to a conclusion, the girl and her father in revenge applied to the Magistrates of Glasgow for a common meditatione fugo warrant on the alledgeance that the complainer was going to leave the country, on which he was incarcerated and instantly liberated on caution.
    The petitioner still continued after the dissolution of the copartnery to carry on the tambouring business, and having lost by that copartnery, and having no stock, was necessarily obliged to contract debt. This will be the less surprising when your Lordship is informed that he had 35 female apprentices to maintain besides his own family. The way he carried on business was to take on goods on credit, tambour them and send them to England for sale; and while he was going on to reap the fruits of his industry in the tambour of his apprentices, whom at much trouble and expence he had taught a valuable branch of business, he found his enemies, and particularly Mr. Robertson making him out as the object of their vengeance. Mr Robertson lost no opportunity of spiriting up his creditors to distress him in order to ruin him, and obtain the apprentices to himself, now that their service was valuable. One meditatione fugo warrant was followed by another. The complainer who from being a stranger; was unacquainted with the laws of this country, was astonished to find himself perpetually apprehended on fugo warrants granted by the Magistrates of Glasgow, and that even at the instance of those he was noways indebted to, as in the case of his apprentice already mentioned. He had no intention and it was very much contrary to his interest to leave 35 apprentices and renounce the profits he could not fail to reap from their labour, and he could not conceive why the Magistrates should issue forth warrants against him. He found he could struggle no longer; and perceiving as he thought, that the Magistrates and the whole inhabitants of Glasgow had conspired his ruin: he therefore resolved to leave the country without even communicating this resolution to his wife, and having gone to Shiells where he had sent off sometime before goods to sell as usual, he wrote the letter to his wife so much founded on by the respondent which was intercepted.
    The complainer will not presume to justify this rash step, nor the terms in which this letter is conceived. But your Lordship has only partial quotations from it in the answers, and to understand the complainer's situation and the motives which induced him to take this step, your Lordship will please peruse the whole letter which is produced with the answers. You will there find that the complainer was pained to the heart at the step he was compelled to take, which he imputes to the cruel and unjust treatment he had long met with from Mr Robertson. His mind was filled with horror at the treatment he had experienced and being possessed of a strong sensibility he expresses his detestation, at the manner his ruin was accomplished in too strong terms. Your Lordship will make the proper allowance for his warmth. You will discriminate between unintentional justice and intended fraud and on the whole it is hoped your Lordship will form a character of the complainer different from what the respondent represents him to be.
    It will not escape your Lordships notice perusing this confidential letter to his wife, that there is no mention there of his having been a convict and a swindler, or of his intending to figure in any borrowed character. Had he done so formerly, his wife must have known it and to her who by the respondent's account knew he had acted the imposter and the villain, he would not have talked as he there does of "a dependence on providence as his best friend" of his own justice tenderness and humanity and of his framing his apprentices mind to virtue and their hands to industry." This letter affords strong evidence that the accusations made by the respondent against him are totally groundless.
    It is stated in the answers as if the complainer was on his being brought back to Glasgow, incarcerated on meditatione fugo warrants. The fact however is otherways. It was on a petition to the Magistrates at the instance of Robertson and others charging him with having fled the country with the goods of other people intrusted him to tambour, which prayed to incarcerate him till liberated in due course of law, and a warrant was accordingly granted to that effect. A copy of the petition and warrant is herewith produced. The complainer was then confined as a criminal, locked up amongst the vilest of them, and remained in prison as such, till liberated from close confinement after having run his letters in order to trail in terms of the statute; and it was not till he had execute these letters that the respondent and others applied for and obtained the fugo warrants on which he is now detained.
    Your Lordship will attend to the fact, that there were no goods sent off by him which belonged to other people or which he was entrusted to tambour as falsely stated by the respondent. Indeed his resolution to leave the country was executed as soon as formed, and he herewith produces a letter from Mr Robertson's son in law acknowledging receipt of £41 19s a few days only before the complainer went off to Shiells. - when your Lordship sees him paying so large a sum just before he left Glasgow you will not believe that he intended fraud but that his removal was the effect of apprehension which drove him to desperation. Every thing was seized by Brown who followed him to Shiells, but the cloths on his back and his household furniture was instantly poinded and sold off by his creditors a few days after he was thrown in jail he whenever required by his creditors he granted them a conveyance to the goods brought down from Shiells and the same were sold off and distributed among his creditors as appears from the inventory & sales herewith produced, so that he did not retain an article of goods nor a shilling to himself. This being the case it is speaking against his own conviction for the respondent to say that his object for detaining the complainer in jail is to recover his effects and particularly "the goods he ran away with". It is even admitted by Mr Robertson in the petition for the criminal warrant already mentioned, that the other creditors had possession of the whole goods he sent to England and the complainer solemnly assures your Lordship that he has not a farthing nor farthings worth on earth.
    The object of Mr Robertson in keeping the complainer in jail is as stated in the bill of advocation of a very different nature. It is to compel him to accuse himself of crimes and to enact himself to go into banishment. This object is so horrid inhuman and subversive of all law and justice that it is not wonderful Mr Robertson should deny it. The fact however is certain. The particulars of it shall be now stated to your Lordships.
    The complainer found his situation in jail every day accumulating misery on himself and his family. The death of his son a child of 15 months old who died in April last, which was solely occasioned by his inability to afford him such necessaries as this state of childhood required, gave extreme pain to the complainer. This was aggravated by the consideration that he had not a penny on earth to enable him to defray the expence of depositing his only son's remains in the grave, and that it was out of his power to attend the funeral himself. In this situation he applied to Mr Robertson and his other creditors and craved the liberty of an hours liberation to deposit the corpse in the grave. His other creditors not only consented to the request, but collected a few shilling for him to pay the funeral charges, but Mr Robertson would not consent; and of consequence the complainer was obliged to commit the last duty he owed his child to strangers.
    The letter the complainer sent to Mr Robertson on this occasion was answered by a verbal message that he already knew the only condition on which his liberation for a moment would be consented to. Mr Robertson's own son in law Mr. Newbigging on this occasion seemed to have been awakened to a sense of humanity, as your Lordship will see by the following letter he sent the complainer "A Newbigging has just received J White's letter to Mr Robertson and will tomorrow hand it to him. J White has A.N.'s sympathy under his distress and the loss of his child, in saying so he wishes not however to imitate those who say "be ye warmed or bloathed" [bloated?] would be glad to send a few shillings send [inserted]
say
a few shillings if he knew how to convey it. Saturday 10 o'clock 29 April 1786. This letter is quoted to your Lordship in honour of that young Gentleman, and to show his conviction of the complainer's poverty and wretchedness. It affords a contrast to the conduct of his father in law, who the complainer feels set at nought every principle of justice and humanity in his conduct towards him. "May his grey hairs however go down to the grave in peace and before he quits life may he repent of this conduct and initiate the humanity and virtues of this young gentleman to whom he is so nearly connected".
    Till this time the complainer was able to do a little work in jail and to support his wife and family in a little room adjoining to the prison; but his health and spirits now received such a shock that he could not labour as he had done. The complainer therefore being unable to maintain even this wretched apartment over his family's head, was necessitated to give it up and took his wife who was big with child and his other child to stay with him in prison in a small apartment allotted to him by the Magistrates on his application to them. The jailer, who is too much Mr Robertson's friend to be his, having refused the complainer such indulgence. In this small apartment of the prison his wife was delivered of a child in the beginning of last September. Her delivery was followed with a slow fever out of which she is yet scarcely recovered, and the complainer was alone obliged to his fellow prisoner for such small supplies of money as sustained her life. The complainer will not shock your Lordships humanity by a picture of this additional distress. His heart is too big and his hand too weak to finish such a figure,- he shall pass over this miserable scene and turn your Lordships attention to what passed between him and Mr Robertson.
    He had yet hopes the hard heart of Mr Robertson would relent and accordingly he wrote him the following letter a few days after his wife's delivery.
Mr James Robertson
Glasgow Tolbooth, Eight September 1786.
    My wife was brought to bed last Wednesday morning at 7 o'clock, her situation is such as pierce my heart.- Unable to support her in the common necessities of life or even to have a person to be with her. You are both a husband and a father,- judge of my situation.
    Would you but be guided by the feeling of humanity and relent, you would do honour to humanity and put it (in process of time) in my power to serve you. Surely Sir a jail will never pay my debts. Eleven months am I here and the only service it can have procured is the complete ruin of an unfortunate family.
    I humbly beg Sir that you would consent to my liberation. I have nothing to offer. I am poor and to such a degree is my poverty that I even cannot give bred to my family. I shall hols myself by every tie of gratitude to do my utmost to become useful, were you willing to liberate me [to] allow me the liberty to present my child to baptism. I shall return if you require it to jail. But Sir it cannot be any pleasure to keep a man who hath nothing to give I would be willing to do anything that is in my power to obtain my liberty.
    In hope of having my humble request granted I remain with respect, Sir, Your very humble and most obedient servant. Signed, John White. NB A line from you informing me of my fate will much oblige me.
    Your Lordships will attend to the answer the complainer received to this letter. It is in these words.
"The following remarks on Jno White's letter to Mr Robertson are sent him by a person who hath no pleasure in the distress of his fellow creatures".
    Mr Lang being this day from home was perhaps the chief reason why no answer was sent to that letter. J. W.'s liberation will certainly take place when ever he chuses to enact himself for leaving the country. Mr Lang will most likely on monday take the necessary steps to that purpose. Security for good behaviour on remaining here it's presumed need hardly be offered, yet if a character approved was willing to supply that ground, from a certain quarter duice would be given for acquiescence Tho' its dread it would be without effect. Glasgow 9th September 1786.
    This paper the original of which is herewith produced is directed on the back "Jno White Tolbooth" and was given the jailer to be handed to the complainer. It is not signed by any person but without doubt it is the production of Mr Robertson's son in law Mr Newbigging, who it seems Mr Robertson had employed to answer the complainers letter, tho' a third hand has been employed to write it. Your Lordship has it here declared in express words that Mr Robertson's resolution is to keep the complainer in jail on his fugo warrant till he enacted himself to leave the country. It is not therefore surprising he did not give more compleat evidence of this diabolical resolution by signing these remarks or writing a letter from himself.
    It has been stated to your Lordship in the bill of advocation that the complainer was brought to such a pitch of wretchedness and misery, that he was willing to purchase his liberation by consenting to leave the country. He therefore answered the remarks by the following letter to Mr Robertson.                             
Glasgow Tolbooth 14 September 1786.
 Sir, Since I received the remarks as an answer to my letter of the 8th ultimo I was in hope to have heard from you or seen Mr Lang, my long confinement has rendered me so miserable that I would consent almost to anything to obtain my liberty. Longer I stay here and more distresses and those of my family will increase. Would you be so good as to desire Mr Lang to call on me and inform me of what is expected I shall do all in my power to forward the business. Was it possible for you to conceive what has been the sufferings of my family of late.[?] You could not help pitying them. I am of in extreme poverty and unable to support them any longer, and unless soon out they'll be obliged to solicit the cold hand of charity for a morsel of bread: that thought alone distract me and all the horror of such compleat misery will drive me into despair. See me or send Mr Lang is all I wish. I am with respect, Sir, Your very humble servt. Signed John White. N.B. My child being not yet christened I wish if possible to have been out of this week to have it over next Sunday.
    In consequence of the request of this letter that Mr Lang would call on the complainer and inform him of what was expected of him, Lang sent his clerk to the complainer next day with a verbal answer that Mr Robertson would not consent to his liberation on any other terms but his petition in the Magistrates for banishment as a criminal and enacting himself in their court books to banish himself for life. The complainer desired the young man to tell Mr Lang and Robertson that he would willingly give a private obligation to quit the country immediately, but would never disgrace himself and family by a confession of crimes of which he was innocent. The young man expressed his horror at the terms that were demanded of the complainer and told him that he would not advise him to comply with them, but would befriend him as far as lay in his power,- he then left the complainer and he heard no more of the matter till some days after, when John Angus, a writer in Glasgow who had formerly done business for the complainer came to prison and told him Mr Lang had met him in the Town Clerk's Chamber and declared to him Mr Robertson's positive resolution to hold him in jail till he complied with the request of petitioning the Magistrates and enacting himself as a felon. Such are the facts with regard to this matter,- they speak for themselves and so far as they are uninstructed that are capable of proof. The complainer offered to bring such proof before the Magistrates but his request was denied and no proof allowed, He will still go on to such proof if Mr Robertson persists in denying; and your Lordship if you see cause, will please remit to the Magistrates to take the proof, in the course of which the complainer will establish every one of these facts. Probably your Lordship, or the court if your Lordship reports this cause, will think it necessary to call Mr Robertson & Mr Lang personally before you, and oblige them to produce the above letters, which are here copied, that the fact may be instantly verified. Your Lordship will attend that many months before his this time and some days before his first application to the Magistrates for an alimnent, thew complainer was liberated from the criminal warrand, and by having run this letters in order to trial thereby established his innocence of the crime he was accused of.
    Here the complainer will pause a moment to allow your Lordship to view Mr Robertson's conduct on the whole. What has not the complainer suffered from this gentleman! and to what unjustifiable scheme is his views directed. The complainer trusts in your Lordships humanity and justice that he will obtain due redress. His present demand for an increase of aliment to keep himself alive is but a moderate request. A little bread and a little water to enable them to drag out a miserable existence in jail is but a small recompence fore the wrongs they have suffered from this gentleman.
    The complainer does not intend to deny that he has wrought at his business in jail, when work offered and health permitted. Had he not done so, every one of his family would long ere now have died of want, and their present existence would be a miracle in nature. A penny or thee half pence a day would not have supported life. His earnings had he every conveniency of tools and workmanship and constant employment, would not be more than two shillings a day. He has neither, and he has been lately obliged on account of the cold weather to quit the little apartment he formerly lived in with his family which has no fire place, and go into the common rooms among nine other debtors where he has no conveniency, tho' he had work to manufacture,- but he has none and very little indeed comes his way. Unless therefore your Lordship increase his aliment the complainer and his family must certainly must certainly be starved to death throughout the winter. The certificate of the jailer who is Mr Robertson's friend cannot be taken as evidence, but at any rate it is no contradiction to what is here stated.
    An apology is due to your Lordship for the length of this paper. The complainer hopes his peculiar situation & the nature of his case will be his excuse. He shall only add that he trusts your Lordship will not only increase his aliment, but give him due redress for the oppression and injustice he has met with from the respondent. In respect whereof &c. Willm Whyte, for the complainer. [NAS, CS271/5992 Replies for John Whyte]
    This document was followed by what is a summing up of the case to this point, by one of the members of the Court of Session, Lord Henderland (1736-1795) after a discussion with his fellow judges. It repeats much of what  has gone before and has been edited here but it provides a good summary  without all of the extraneous detail provided by the litigants. It also indicates a change in the attitude of the Court to the case and may have been a response to a Bill of Advocation by James Robertson that does not appear among these papers. From the answers by White and replies by Robertson, he appears to have challenged the petition by White to have his aliment raised to 1 shilling per day. Another unknown element of his petition was refused. There is just a hint a hint that the case is becoming an embarrasment because White has been kept for such a long period under a legal warrant designed to simply prevent a debtor feeing until a case can be mounted against them. This is is followed by a Minute for John White written by a lawyer, John Wright on 22 February 1787 - an altogether sharper legal mind.
14 February 1787: Lord Henderland Reporter.
    Memorial for James Robertson and others, creditors of John White, present prisoner in the Tolbooth of Glasgow, defender against the said John White, pursuer.
    Towards the end of the year 1783 the said John White came to Glasgow, with an intention as he gave [ente?] to carry on there the business of embroidery and tambour working, and brought with him a letter of recommendation to the memorialist, Mr Robison from Mr William Greene, a manufacturer at Hull.
    Mr White was by no means deficient in talent, and he soon had the address to persuade Mr Robison to engage with him in a copartnery for carrying on that business on a pretty extensive plan. Accordingly in the very beginning of January 1784, a regular copartnery was formed, White being to conduct the operative part of the business and to instruct apprentices, while on the other hand Mr Robison was to advance the whole money requisite, and to manage the sales of the company goods. In connection with this plan, Mr Robison did immediately at a considerable expence provide a proper house in the near neighbourhood of Glasgow where White and his family should reside and carry on the manufacture. He farther provided White with furniture for his house and every proper convenience and the business being commenced, a number of young girls were got to engage as apprentices, and to become bound by regular indentures. In a very short time the apprentices came to amount to no fewer than thirty one, and the manufacture went on in a seemingly prosperous way; Mr Robison all the while furnishing the requisite supplies of cash.
    Matters however did not continue long in this seemingly prosperous way. Mr. White seemed to have some pursuits of his own that withdrew his attention from the Company business. It was found that in place of occupying the apprentices in embroidery and tambour work he often employed the apprentices in other things for his own particular profit and complaints arose of his maltreating the young girls and attempting to seduce and corrupt them.
    When these reports first reached Mr Robison he was unwilling to give credit to them, but they at length became too strong to be resisted; and indeed the parents came in a body to him claiming his protection and insisting that he should prosecute White. Accordingly, after a proper inquiry into the facts, Mr Robison thought it his duty in autumn 1784 to exhibit a complaint against White to the Magistrates of Glasgow and the consequence was that a proof was allowed. It will readily occur to your Lordships how difficult it would be to get young girls possessed of modesty to give evidence on a matter of so much delicacy. The result was that the proof was defective, and Mr White was thereupon assoilzied.
    The evidence although perhaps not so complete as to found a legal conviction was yet sufficient to satisfy everyone that Mr White was by no means guiltless, and Mr Robison therefore resolved immediately to put an end to their connection. He did so accordingly, and upon 6 January 1785 a contract of Separation was executed; and while being indebted to Mr Robison in the sum of £189 10s he became bound to pay the same at three different periods viz. £63 3s 4d on 24 August 1785, 24 May 1786 and 24 February 1787.
    After the copartnery was thus dissolved Mr White proceeded to carry on the business on his own account, and in the course of summer 1785 had the address to get from a variety of different hands goods to a large amount.
    About the end of September 1785, when Mr Robison coming very early of a morning from his country home to town, had occasion to pass White's manufactory, he was surprised to find a cart standing at the door loaded with furniture just ready to set off. Upon inquiring into the meaning of this, he was told that the furniture was poinded by one of White's creditors, & that White himself had some days before gone off. This intelligence was a little unexpected, but Mr Robison luckily recollecting that as proprietor of the house he had a [hypetha?] upon the furniture for payment of his rent, so he stopped the goods from being carried off and had them replaced in the house. Having done this he then went into the house, and there found that all the apprentices were dismissed & the work was totally given up, and that everything had been carried away excepting the furniture which he had luckily laid hold of upon the cart at the door. He found indeed that White had left his wife behind him and upon inquiring at her about her husband she artfully told him that he had gone off with another woman; had taken boat with her at the Broomilaw with all his effects; and that she believed she believed he was gone for Ireland.
    Upon this Mr Robison immediately came to town and very soon discovered that no such passenger had sailed from the Broomilaw, the story being singular it soon reached the ears of White's creditors who had been swindled out of the goods which he had eloped and they immediately called a meeting to consider what should be done.
    It was unanimously agreed that they should follow joint measures for the recovery of their property, and for apprehending the fugitive and they persuaded Mr Andrew Brown one of their number to take the trouble of setting out in pursuit of Whyte who in place of going for Ireland had, it was suspected, gone towards England.
    With the view of having White apprehended a number of creditors signed a power of attorney to Mr Brown to act as their agent who thereupon presented a petition to the Sheriff Depute of Lanark setting forth the debts of his constituents, and that the said John White has within these four days past deserted his dwelling house, and in a clandestine manner picked up and carried away his stock of goods and effects, and is as the petitioner has good reason to suspect about to go beyond seas without paying the said debts & wt a purpose to defraud his creditors.
    The petition therefore concluded with praying for a warrant to search for apprehend and imprison the person of the said John White till he should find caution de judicio sisti & in case the said John White has fled from the county of Lanark to recommend to judges and Justices of the peace within those bounds he may be found to grant concurrence to and enforce the execution of the warrant to follow hereon so as the petitioners constituents may obtain justice from the said John White.
    Mr. Brown having made oath to his having good reason to suspect White to be in meditatione fugo and about to go beyond seas without paying the aforesdaid debts, the Sheriff 3 October 1785 granted a warrant for apprehending and bringing White before him for examination and Mr. Brown immediately set out with this warrant in his pocket: Having been so lucky as get some tiding of his route, he traced him to Newcastle where he found White had appeared under the name of Mr. John Primrose - and had gone to North Sheilds to embark for London.
Upon discovering this Mr. Brown immediately presented to a Justice of Peace at New Castle the warrant of the Sheriff of Lanark, and thereupon the following deliverance was given6 October, HM Justices of the Peace in Newcastle made out a warrant for his apprehension. He found White in North Shields [north of the Tyne river, seven and a half miles to the east of Bottle Bank, on the coast] as John Primrose and White offered him goods to the value of the amount outstanding. Refused.
    White had been sending off packets of materials to a John Primrose, Bottle Bank, Newcastle [Now an area on the south side of the Tyne, in Gateshead close to the Centre] where he had some confidential correspondent to take care of them. Some of these parcels had been put on the vessel without going through customs. All his goods had been seized by the Customs and were now in the Custom's house.
    In bringing John White in the Dilligence from Shields to Newcastle, there happened to be on the coach a Captain John Stamp who perfectly recalled the person of Mr. Whyte, he having seen him before as a convict on board one of the hulks on the Thames. This accidental circumstance luckily enabled Mr. Brown the more easily to discover Mr. Whyte's plans, of which he had got some slight hints. Captain Stamp having been brought before the mayor of Newcastle emitted a disposition, a copy of which is [printed?] and annexed in the appendix. [in bundle NAS, CS271/5992, in mss only] Afterwards Captain John Marshall emitted another deposition, a copy of which is also hereto annexed." [ditto - transcribed here on the right]
    Whyte [the spelling varies] was brought to Glasgow on 8 October 1785 on a warrant from the Mayor of Newcastle and committed to prison. The goods in Newcastle Customs were, with some difficulty, released and sold in Glasgow the proceeds going to the creditors - produced £258 17s 4d. The items found on the cart were sold for £49 4s. Whyte owed £700 including the debt of £139. The greater part of the stolen goods were therefore still concealed but White would not tell them where.
    In January, February and March 1786 the girls who had been bound apprentice, did with the concurrence of their parents, apply by petition to the Magistrates of Glasgow, that as a consequence of the very improper treatment that had been obliged to quit his service and praying that as now Whyte was imprisoned for fraud, their indentures might be discharged and this was agreed.
    While in prison White earned between 3 and 4 shillings per day [£61-82 per 7 day week today] tambouring and lived very comfortably 'and he flattered himself that by obliging his creditors to aliment him he would at length tire them and obtain his liberty'.
[He then refers to the process leading to the Interlocutor to pay the 1s aliment]:
    As soon as this interlocutor was pronounced the agent for the creditors immediately applied to the Clerk to the Bills to get up the process in order to present a reclaiming petition, but this the Clerk refused, mentioning it to be the universal practice in such cases that it could be given to none but the complainer's doer and that nothing could be done in the way of obtaining redress till the judgement was applied. Whyte's doer accordingly got the process and such dispatch was used that the very next day Whyte presented a petition to the Magistrates and produced therewith the principle Bill of Advocation with the interlocutor thereon.
    Upon that the Magistrates immediately gave the following deliverance 'In respect of the Interlocutor mentioned in the petition and annexed to the Bill of Advocation, modifies an aliment to the petitioner John White at the rate of 1s per day to commence at this date and discerns accordingly'.
[White had applied for a Bill of Suspension and Liberation because the period of 6 months he was allowed to find caution had expired.
This memorandum is asking if White is entitled to 1s per day under the Act of 1696 Chap. 32. They say not - he is a swindler, a foreigner and he is very general [underlined in text] in his descriptions of where he came from in Germany, exactly where he had worked previously or carried on his business etc. They recite the history]:
    His first appearance in England seems to have been as Peter le Maitre under which name he kept a tambour shop in Oxford, where he stole the medals etc. he was detained by Sir John Fielding's men in Dublin. It is believed that after four years on the hulks he opened a tambour school in Woolwich, Kent and that he and a sailor's wife, who also kept a school at Woolwich, eloped and ran off together. They were last heard of in Hull. That Peter le Maitre is now in Glasgow and that 3 months ago he eloped from Glasgow, leaving the sailor's wife there. He was pursued by Andrew Brown to Sheilds…etc. While at Hull Peter le Maitre took the name John White and gave himself to be a Methodist. He got into the favour of William Greene, a very pious and worthy gentleman of that place.
[Henderland Explains that the Act of 1696 Chap 32 is for the relief of prisoners in debt through innocent misfortune. It was there to protect the poor prisoners who had no income - Whyte has 3s per day].
Claims that the letters written in support of White by the son in law of James Robertson and relenting his hard situation, were written by White himself. [NAS, CS271/41987]
A minute for the Court was written by John Wright for John White, in response to Robertson's Bill of Advocation [which is not here]:
22 February 1787. Memorial for John White tambour worker in Glasgow a prisoner in the Tolbooth there, respondent in the process of Advocation lately brought by James Robertson and Andrew Brown, two of the memorialists creditors complaining of the quantum of aliment modified to him by the Court's instructions in Decr [December] last.
    Few persons in times of peace and Humanity, have sufferit like the memor[ialist] and his porr family for a meer deficiency of funds to pay a due debt after his oppressors have relinquished every attempt to convict him of any crime. The severist of all his creditors must now be convinced that he has made a faithful surrender of all that belonged to him whatever may be pretended to the contrary. The pale countenances, the ragged clothing, the cold and pinched abode of him, his wife and surviving infant children in prison now for the space of sixteen months must demonstrate that there are no concealed funds. The maxim of this complainer however continues to be Quad non habit in an luat inpelle although by the law of all civilised countries simple and partial insolvency per se is considered but a fatality and misfortune befalling both debtor and creditor. The complainer with a view to justify his severity invented a false history of the memorialist. A computation of those falsehoods is the substance of this whole paper.
    The memorialist is a native of Germany. He came to Britain about 20 years ago when very young tambouring and embroidery was the business he made choice of and followed with success until by misfortune he became connected with Mr. Robertson the complainer. The stories fabricated to his prejudice in the paper in process are both cruel and calumnious. Viz. That passing for a painter or hairdresser at Oxford in England he had got access to the museum and there stole gold medals. That as a felon he had been condemned to work on the Thames. That he occasionally changed his name and profession sometimes figured as a German Count and was to all intents and purposes a swindler. His accusers however had every opportunity of bringing their party to a criminal trial and they would have done so had they not been convinced their charges were false.
    In the year 1784 the memorialist was recommended to Mr. Robertson the complainer by Mr. Willm. Green an eminent merchant at Hull with whom he had been intimate; upon that a copartnery between them [White and Robertson] in the tambourwork commenced at Glasgow. The memorialist engaged about 30 female apprentices whom he maintained and instructed in the business at a great expence for a long times. Mr Robertson new that the apprentices were profficient thought he would reap a rich harvest by their means if he could devise the memorialists ruin and banishment from the place after the apprentices were taught. His first device was to prefer a complaint to the Magistrates of Glasgow charging the memorialist with the crime of abusing and maltreating the apprentices. The Magistrates on a full investigation and proof acquitted the memorialist. The malevolent intention of Mr. Robertson in that prosecution appears best by the interlocutor pronounced by the Magistrates which runs thus:
Having considered the pursuers petition, missive letters of copartnery, produced answers for the defender, Replies for the pursuer, with the depositions and declarations of the witnesses adduced for the parties respectively memorial for the defender of the 1st Novr. curt. [1787] and answers thereto, Finds that the pursuer has brought no proof of any maltreatment by the defender of his apprentices or of corrections inflicted by him upon them sufficient to justify this process or the conclusion of the prayer of the said petitioner nor any proof that complaints were made by the parents of said apprentices of their being maltreated by the defender or that the pursuer was desired or required by the said parents to raise this process On the contrary, Finds it proved that the defr. has bestowed great care and attention upon the religion morals and general behavious of the said apprentices and in properly cloathing, feeding and lodging them and that he has inflicted no severer corrections upon them than what was necessary for maintaining suitable order and decorum in his family and propriety and behaviour from said apprentices to each other: Therefore assoilizises the defender from this action and finds the pursuer liable to him in the expence of process, which modifies to £10 12s Sterlg. for which decrees and for the expence of extracting &c. reserving to the defender his right of insisting against the pursuer for damages incurred by him from loss of time or otherways in any competent action as accords with law (or otherways - crossed through) and in respect there are many expressions in the 2d, 3d and 8 pages of the said repilies (which are now marked with black strokes under the lines of them) which are injurious to the defenders character unconnected with the merits of this process and disrespectful to the Court. Ordains the said expressions to be erased from the debate but as they may still remain legible fines and emericates John Lang, Writer in Glasgow by whom the replies are subscribed in 10s Sterling for the use of the poor and ordains the said John Lang to be imprisoned till he make payment of the same.
The interlocutor ascertains the complainer s disposition towards the memorialist better than many pages of declamation and argument pro or con. The disappointment and stigma it implies whetted the sordid and pecuniary motives formerly mentioned into a keen and settled resentment. So that nothing can now satisfy this gentleman and his operator Mr. Laing as appears by writign in process unless the poor memorialist shall enact himself to be banished Scotland for life as a culprit a punishment which the supreme Court alone can inflict and that too in consequence of Judicial conviction or confession.
    One immediate effect of this process and interlocutor was a dissolution of the copartnery "Societas est mater discordiarum" much more so after the resentment of the partners had been evicted by a criminal prosecution. The complainer in terms of his obligation had advanced money to carry on the business. The memorialist now agreed to pay Mr. Robertson about £126 Stg. at two separate installments on condition that the 31 apprentices were to be retained by himself who had alone taught them. The memorialist's industry accompanied with the dexterity of the young ones he had bred could have soon put him out of the [severence?] of Mr. Robertson with his claim of £126 Stg. but this gentleman had recourse to other artifices to render it impossible for the memorialist either to benefit or to pay.
    The chief engines of oppression remaining in this country under a Court of law are meditatione fugo warrant by which it seems are now obtained of course without precognition or even the slightest probability of truth. The very oath of meditatione fugo as well as the Judges warrant are often to be found printed and the blanks for the names are instantly filled up in writing. Persons of the most unfavourable character who take the designation of Writers are employed to carry the design into execution. People who owe no debts can hardly be suspected of crimes and  consequently have not the most distant intention to fly are often lodged in prison before they have an opportunity of finding a friend to become baill at an expence perhaps greater than the pretended debt and next day perhaps the pursuer fails to appear to support his demand when baill is offered. Persons oppressed in this way are by their poverty unable to bring their complaints before your Lops. Their oppressors often are equally poor. It is an oppression too that cannot admit of retaliation by an honest man even by way of defence For tho' one should swear that I owe him and that I am going to leave the country both which may be false yet I ought not to swear the same things against him, if not strictly true although probable.
    It appears that fugo warrants are as easily procured about Glasgow as about Edinr. The memorialist was [since] served with one after his copartnery with Robertson was dissolved one of the apprentices had deserted her service. The memorialist charged her and her father as cautioner on Letters of Horning. A Bill of Suspension was by them presented and during the defendence of that Suspension which never came to conclusion the Suspr. obtained from the Magistrates a meditatione fugo warrant upon the hackneyed oath that the party was going to leave the country; and on that warrant the memorialist was incarcerated but instantly liberate on baill. No thought was more remote form the memorialist's mind than to fly the country at that time and nothing could be more incredible in itself. He had now for years boarded and cloathed above 30 apprentices at great expence and the profits which were to refund him during the course of their indentures were but first begun. But as was said already it appears that an oath of this kind is become a matter of course tho' it often involves the one party in the suit of perjury and the other in bankruptcy and ruin.
    Mr. Robertson had now discovered this easy method of hariassing the memorialist by means of a fugo warrants without intermission as best calculated to render his situation intolerable in the place and in expectation to have the whole benefits of the apprentices to himself when he should effect the banishment of him who had taught them. The memorialist had contracted some debts in Glasgow by the maintenance of so great a number of them before they could earn anything in return. His method of business was to purchase on credit goods for the purpose of tambouring and embroidery and to dispose of the goods so manufactured chiefly in England the returns of which were ready to retire the obligations which he granted at home from time to time. From this period Mr. Robertson neglected no opportunity to persuade those to whom the memorialist owed any thing that he was in meditatione fugo. Hence one warrant of that sort was succeeded by another until the memorialist became apprehensive that the whole City of Glasgow was in league with him.
    He has been a stranger to such attachments on the other side of the Tweed where one cannot be dragged out of his own house for a civil debt far less upon a false oath misleading a Judge when no debt is due as was done by the apprentice and her father in the Suspension mentioned above. Perhaps likewise he recollected that in many places at least on the Continent of Europe from which he originally came, nobody can be incarcerated at all for a debt contracted without any criminality or wrong where all the leiges together have the same personal protection that peers married women and pupils enjoy in this country.
    The memorialist after meeting with so much harsh treatment in Glasgow formed in harvest 1785 a resolution for setting off for England in order to dispose of goods he had formerly sent there as usual. He expected to make his markets to much greater advantage in person than by commission. His chief view was to convert as much of funds as possible into cash and by that means to make speedy payment to Mr. Robertson and his other personal creditors. This he thought would procure a legal security at least against fugo warrants.
    A convincing evidence that the memorialist set out for England with no view of defrauding his creditors is that a few days before his departure he made partial payment to this Court to the amount of £40 and upwards. He did not indeed communicate to his creditors his resolution and soon after he was gone one Andrew Brown was dispatched at request of them with a fugo warrant from Glasgow who overtook him at North Shiels - Brown applied to a Magistrate there to have him secured as a criminal escaping from justice who had carried off goods not his own. the English Magistrate required affidavit before he would comply and Brown procured one Stamp who was unknown to the memorialist and who with other falsehoods swore he had seen him confined to work on the Thames as a convict. The fugo warrant from Glasgow was likewise false for the whole goods seized did belong to the memorialist and to no other.
    The memorialist in virtue of the fugo warrant and the English Magistrate's concurrence therein, was brot to Glasgow loaded with irons. All his goods that were in England soon followed which together with his whole household furniture was surrendered and sold for behoof of his creditors when brought to Glasgow he was thrown into prison on the fugo warrant and the value of his funds at the common market prices would in all probability extinguished the debts and much more but as commonly happens at such sales of goods of that sort, they went off abundantly cheap. The same brought £30 1s 4d Stg. and Mr. Robertson by this sale drew about £40 which with the £40 odds mentioned already reduced his debt of £126 to about £40 of balance which ballance would have been paid before now had the memorialist been at liberty.
    The personal condition of the memorialist now for 16 months and upwards in prison is the subject of the litigation which has swelled to a process of immense bulk. The whole object of the creditors or rather of Mr. Robertson alone by this expence to himself and trouble to the Court as well as to those who from compassion have assisted the memorialist is to detain his debtor in perpetual prison with little or no aliment or to compell him publicly to sign his own banishment after a fair surrender of his all. When the memorialist was brought back from England made prisoner there in the most illegal manner on the fugo warrant and lodged in the jail a petition was preserved to the Magistrates of Glasgow charging him with fraud and breach of trust. "That he had carried off goods belonging to the inhabitants there which were entrusted to him for the purpose of being tamboured. That he is a foreigner bound by no tie to this country and intended to embark for America with what he had got together by swindling and desiring to have him incarcerated with a view to a criminal trial or until liberated in due course of law".  The memorialist was accordingly conscious of his innocence however although very misfortunate he did not dread the course of justice and after a sufficient delay on the part of his accusers he [won ran?] his letters in terms of the Statute 1701.
    It must be admitted that the respondent finding when he came to north Sheills that he would not get sale for his goods formed the resolution of not returning to Glasgow immediately as he well knew that without carrying back money with him he could not expect to remain there in safety his situation at the time will be conceived from the contents of the letter he wrote his wife, so much founded on by the complainers/ Your Lops will perceive that this resolution was the result of the oppression and injustice he had met with not a premeditated design on his part. It is therefore improper in the complainer to make this letter their constant topic of declamation and an excuse for starving  the memorialist and his family in prison. It was a confidential letter to his wife. The schemes therein mentioned might never be executed and the complainer got hold of it by an unwarrantable seizure of all his papers as if he had been accused of High Treason.
    The period within which criminal trial should have been brought was allowed to elapse as the complainers were sensible that they could not establish their charge and the memorialist still remained confined for many months after one meditatione fugo warrant. The memorialist was now to be considered as confined for a debt purely civil. He therefore applied for the benefit of the Act 1696. An aliment first of 4d and then of 6d per diem was alloted him but this allowance was far from being adequate to the support of him, his wife and several infant children. His petition to the Magistrates for an augmentation was refused. He presented a bill of Advocation which with answers replies and duplies was taken to report by Lord Henderland, when of this date the following interlocutor was pronounced:
The Lord Ordinary having considered this bill, answers and replies and duplies and writes [writs] produced and having advised with the Lords refuses the bill and in respect of the particular circumstances of this caseremitts to the Magistrates of Glasgow with this instruction that they modify an aliment to the complainer of one shilling per day.
The memorialist presented a petition to the Magistrates to have this remitt and instruction applied in common form the Magistrates did so of this date.
In respect of the interlocutor mentioned in the petition annexed to the Bill of Advocation produced, modifies an aliment to the pursuer John Whyte at the rate of 1/- Stg. per day to commence as at this date and discerns accordingly.
When the memorialist's case was stated to your Lops by Lord Henderland it appeared peculiarly distressing. He had then lain in jail for upwards of 14 months on the meditatione fugo warrant executed against him. Your Lops. therefore when you agreed with the Lord ordinary to modify the memorialist a shilling per day expressed your opinion of the impropriety and illegality of holding him so long in jail on such
warrants.
    To procure his liberation the memorialist applied to your Lops by Bill of Suspension and liberation and the same, tho' strongly opposed by Mr. Robertson being reported to the Court was of this date [Decr. 16 1786 in the margin] passed [without crossed through] caution or consignation but in the interim Mr. Robertson expede a Caption of letters of Horning which he had raised against the memorialist in Oct. 1786 and arrested him in jail for the balance of £40 odds he was due him and then presented a bill of Advocation against the interlocutor of the Magistrates which did nothing more than apply the interlocutor of the Court and in which he craves your Lops to find the memorialist entitled to no aliment or to modify it to 4d per day. The bill being advised with answers and replies by Lord Henderland his Lop of this date [Feby. 3rd 1787 in margin]: Ordained the parties to prepare and print  memorials and lodge them in the Lords boxes in ten days that the cause may be reported to the Court.
    The various charges and falsehoods imputed to the memorialists with a view to calumnate rendered the foregoing narration absolutely necessary. It is with reluctance that the memorialist puts your Lops to the trouble of perusing a very abridged state of this melancholy history. He has very little to say respecting this present bill of Advocation by Mr. Robertson on either in point of form or merit. He humbly conceives it to be out of all form if not an incroachment on authority to apply by Advocation against the sentence of an inferior Judge who only puts in execution the peremptory injunctions of your Lops. He cannot figure that the Judgement pronounced by the Magistrates was anything else than that of this Court, otherwise upon the same principles applications might be made to the house of Lords or to yyour Lops by reclaiming petitions after you have applied the decrees or remitts of that house in consequence of an appeal. The impropriety will occur to your Lops from every circumstance. The memorialist shall say no more upon it.
 
    As to the merits of the case the memorialist shall only say that his distress and misery are still known to be as great as ever and that nothing less than the aliment modified by the Court can prevent him and his from perishing. He has already while in prison lost one child, a fine boy through mere want. Mr. Robertson refused his consent to let the memorialist out of prison for a few hours for the sole purpose of attending his child's funeral. His wife was delivered of another child in a wretched apartment of the prison without any of the necessaries requisite in such a situation except what might be bestowed occasionally by the Charity of the humane. He has brought an action of wrongeous imprisonment and damages against Mr. Robertson but before that can be insisted in with effect, he finds it necessary to apply for the benefit of the poor roll. Even that application which in all probability will be opposed by Mr. Robertson must be attended with a considerable delay which would be fatal to the memorialist and his family, if the aliment already modified were taken away or diminished. The complainer has often said that the memorialist is capable to earl an aliment for himself and family in prison. The memorialist acknowledges that he wishes to work and be troublesome to nobody. He has at times got small jobs to do during his confinement. But that subsistence was scanty and precarious. Bad accommodation, want of fire in his apartment, depression of spirits thro misfortune as well as scarcity of work prevents him from earning anythinbg that can be depended upon. And it is submitted to your Lops to consider what benefit can accrue to the complainer by detaining the memorialist in prison earning his own aliment. The apprentices have one by one applied and obtained from the Magistrates a discharge of their indentures because the memorialist  was not in a condition to support them.
    Upon the whole it is hoped your Lops. will have no difficulty to refuse this Bill of Advocation and to find the complainer liable in expences. In respect whereof John Wright.
It may assist in understanding the material here if readers also consult my
